# CHAPTER VII

## Visits to Canada and Berlin

I WAS elected President of the British Association for 1909, when the meeting was to be at Winnipeg. It was just a quarter of a century since the Association had, for the first time in its history, held its meeting outside the British Isles. Then it met at Montreal with Lord Rayleigh, who at that time was Cavendish Professor in Cambridge, as President, while Lord Kelvin was President of Section A. The Association met again in 1897 at Toronto when Sir John Evans was President. It was striking evidence of the immense strides which Canada had made in a quarter of a century that, at the meeting in 1884, Lord Rayleigh paid a visit to Winnipeg, and found that it had not developed beyond the stage when they were ploughing up the streets to get rid of the ruts and make the surface more even. On our arrival we found it a large and prosperous city, with fine buildings set on broad and well-kept streets, and with a population of 200,000.

My wife, brother and son accompanied me on my visit, and in August 1909 we travelled from Liverpool to Quebec by the C.P.R. boat the Empress of Ireland. We sailed up the St. Lawrence to Quebec, and arrived there one evening in the late twilight. The approach to Quebec was so beautiful that after all these years I often try to recall it. The river was quite calm, there was no wind, there was not a cloud in the sky, which made a deep violet background for a crescent moon over the Heights of Abraham.

### Visit to Canada

We stayed the night at Quebec and the next morning walked about the town, which was very different from any we were to see afterwards. The population is mainly French-Canadian. French is the prevalent language: the buildings are old, picturesque and the streets tortuous. There is a Roman Catholic university. The inhabitants are mostly Roman Catholics, though many of them have Scotch names. They were at the time of our visit ardent admirers of Sir Wilfred Laurier, the Prime Minister, who was one of themselves, and they had very exalted ideas of his powers. A story current when we were there was that one of them had asked who would succeed King Edward, and when he was told it would be the Prince of Wales, said, "Why, has he such a pull on Laurier as all that?"

In the afternoon we went to Montreal, and after staying a few hours there, started on our way to Winnipeg. Thanks to the kindness and hospitality of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company the journey was very enjoyable and interesting, and we arrived at Winnipeg without incident. The railway station at Winnipeg is one of the most cosmopolitan places in the world. It is the one on which the streams of immigrants from all countries in eastern Europe converge: Russians, Lithuanians and also Doukhobors, whom I had never heard of before; they are a most industrious and well-behaved race, but it is part of their religion to walk in procession on one day in the year without any clothes. This makes a difficult problem for the local police to deal with. Very few of these immigrants know any English when they arrive and some of them do not seem to learn quickly. During our stay in Winnipeg the Mayor gave a dinner to some of the officials of the Association, and Sir William White and I set out to walk to his house, which we were told was quite near our hotel. We got lost and had to ask our way, and we had to ask six people before we found one who understood English.

The educational authorities seem to deal with this question very effectively: all the teaching is in English. They have a very large room, and when a child with no English first comes to the school it is not put in any class, but just sent into this room to play with the other children. After about three months of this, most of them pick up enough English to be able to follow the lessons well enough to profit by them. We were told that sometimes forty-two languages and dialects might be heard in the big room.

Professor Rutherford was President of Section A (Physics); Professor H. E. Armstrong, of Section B (Chemistry); Dr. Smith Woodward, of Section C (Geology); Dr. Shipley, of Section D (Zoology); Sir Duncan Johnstone, of Section E (Geography); Sir William White, of Section F (Engineering); Professor J. L. Myres, of Section G (Anthropology); Professor Starling, of Section H (Physiology); Lieutenant-Colonel Sir David Prain, of Section K (Botany); and the Rev. H. B. Gray (Education). Among others attending the meeting were Professor Larmor; Professor Poynting, who gave us a paper on "The Pressure of Light"; Professor Lamb, Professor MacMahon, Professor MacDonald from Aberdeen, Professor Hobson, Professor Lyman and Professor Bumstead from Yale. Among the foreign visitors I may specially mention Dr. E. Goldstein from Berlin, one of the earliest workers on the discharge of electricity through gases, and who, in the course of researches extending over more than fifty years, discovered many very important phenomena. He was a pupil of von Helmholtz and worked at first in the Physical Laboratory at Berlin and later in the Observatory at Potsdam; his first paper was published in 1874 and was followed in quick succession by others, each containing some interesting discovery: for these he was awarded the Hughes Medal by the Royal Society in 1908. He died in 1930 at the age of eighty. He read a paper to the Association on the phosphorescent spectra given out by some organic compounds when cooled to the temperature of liquid air. Another foreign visitor was Professor H. Munsterberg, Professor of Experimental Psychology at Harvard. He was exceedingly popular with his students; indeed they were accused of altering the first line of a well-known hymn to "Ein Munsterberg ist Unser Gott". I think the meeting was successful. The various Presidential Addresses were well attended and the discussions well maintained. As was natural in a meeting at the very centre of wheat production in Canada, a lively interest was taken in the prediction made by Sir William Crookes in his Presidential Address to the British Association at Bristol in 1898, that there would, in the not very distant future, not be enough wheat to support the increased population. Actually, since this prediction things have gone the other way, and the production is more than the population can consume, or rather, can afford to buy. It was very interesting to hear how the breeding of a new kind of wheat, which would ripen a fortnight earlier than the kinds known at present, would increase by millions of acres the area on which wheat could be grown.

The evening Discourses were given by Professor Tutton on "The Seven Styles of Crystal Architecture"; by Professor Herdman on "Our Food from the Water"; by Professor H. B. Dixon on "The Chemistry of Flame"; and by Professor J. H. Poynting on "The Pressure of Light". These, as well as the Presidential Addresses, were given in the Walker Theatre, one of the largest playhouses in the Dominion at that time. The Members of the Association received very generous hospitality, and had the opportunity of learning much about the conditions of life in the newly developed regions in Canada. One thing that struck me very forcibly was the importance of the work done by the Young Men's Christian Association in this, and indeed in all the other towns I visited in Canada. The Association has a very fine club-house, much larger than is usual in this country, and a Committee which is active in getting into touch with young men when they arrive, inviting them to join the Club, giving them opportunities of making friends and of joining in many social functions. This must mean a great deal to a young man, not only when he first comes to the town but as long as he stays there. Another feature which struck me is the great part which the big hotel plays in the social life of the place. Everyone who wishes to meet a friend in the evening seems to think that the best chance of finding him is to go to the lounge of the hotel. Many politicians either entertaining their constituents, or arguing with each other, are to be found there, and business men meet to fix up their deals. If anyone wishes to entertain, he does so at the hotel and not at his own house. This custom seems to have spread to this country. When I was in Dublin recently the lounge in my hotel reminded me very strongly of those I had seen in Canada nearly thirty years ago.

We got an example of the mineral wealth of Canada when we were at Winnipeg, for it was discovered during our visit that the sand used for spreading over the roads contained platinum. Long before this the railroads in the cobalt region in Ontario had unwittingly been metalled with silver ore.

The hospitality of the Canadian people did not cease with the meeting of the Association, for as soon as that was over a large party of us were taken on a most entrancing trip to the Pacific, and then back again to Winnipeg by a different way. The long train by which we travelled was equipped with an observation car, with cooks, waiters, etc., in fact it was an hotel on wheels. Our practice was to travel from one place to another by night, spend the day in seeing the place at which we had arrived, or perhaps make an excursion and stay two days. Wherever we stopped we were entertained by the residents, and I had to make a speech thanking them for their hospitality. This was usually very pleasant and I quite enjoyed it, but at one place they had erected a triumphal arch of bags of wheat. It had been put up hastily, and I noticed, during the Mayor's speech of welcome, that the arch was shaking in a way which seemed to me to indicate a speedy collapse. As we were standing under the arch I thought it best to make the warmth of my thanks very pronounced, so as to compensate for their brevity. I shall not make any attempt to describe in detail the scenery through which we passed. Those who have made the trip will find it hard to believe that it is surpassed by any in the world. At first we travelled for many hundred miles through the prairies, covered with wheat almost ready for the harvest. Each puff of wind made a wave travel over them to the horizon: we might to all appearance have been sailing over a great ocean, instead of running on a railroad through a vast cornfield. The effects at sunset or sunrise were most beautiful and remarkable. After passing over the prairies we reached Banff, and saw the buffaloes which flourish in the immense park reserved for them. Then came the Rockies and snow mountains, with visits to Glacier and Lake Louise. When we were looking down the lake from near the hotel, the other end, which had been quite distinct, suddenly became obscure, although no fogs or clouds had been visible. A few seconds after we heard a great noise and the end of the lake soon got clear; an avalanche had fallen while we had been looking. Some little way before we reached Vancouver, which was our next stop, we ran by the side of the Fraser River: it was so full of salmon that it was quite red. It seemed almost as if they were so thick that an agile very light-weight might have crossed the river using them as stepping-stones. As we approached the Pacific the climate changed and became much more like that in England. The heat was not so fierce nor the air so dry as it had been before. Vancouver we found a very busy and apparently flourishing place. It had a university, parks, golf-links and garden suburbs. There was a land boom on when we were there, and everyone seemed to think he was going to make a fortune by buying, or getting an option on, some piece of land, and then selling it at a higher price. All classes seemed to be infected by the rage, and prices were forced up until some pieces of land sold for more than they would have fetched if they had been in the heart of London.

A few hours' sail from Vancouver is Victoria. This is not a commercial place but one of fine houses, beautiful gardens and well-kept lawns. It seems quite a haven of rest after the bustle and noise of Vancouver.

We returned to Winnipeg by a different route, travelling from Edmonton by the Canadian Northern Line and going through Calgary to Winnipeg. From Winnipeg we went to Toronto to stay with my old pupil and friend Professor McLennan, who was Professor of Physics in the University, and had succeeded in inducing the Government of Ontario to find the funds for an exceedingly fine laboratory, large, very well designed, and well provided with instruments both for research and lectures. The laboratory was very elaborately organised. For example, in all but the advanced classes there was a file for each lecture in the course, giving the subjects to be dealt with in the lecture and the order in which they should be taken, mentioning, too, the experiments which should be made and the apparatus which should be used. This method has the advantage that if a Lecturer is unable to lecture, a substitute can give the lecture at very short notice. I should be afraid that this method would tend to make the lectures rather dull. Most people, I think, find that their lectures are more easily followed by their pupils if there is some spontaneity about them, if the Lecturer has to find the words as he goes along, and not read them from a manuscript. It was very delightful to find "Mac" going so strong, and taking such a prominent part in the general business of Toronto University. From Toronto we went to Niagara. We had been living in trains for about thirteen days and had spent most nights travelling. I thought I had slept well in the train, but I more than slept the clock round the first night in the hotel at Niagara. I suppose sleep has two dimensions, depth as well as length, and that the sleep one gets in trains does not rest one as much as the same length of sleep in bed. We returned from Niagara Falls to Quebec through Montreal, and visited the University there. We came home from Quebec by the C.P.R. boat the Empress of Britain. What struck me very forcibly on my visit to the farming district in Canada was the hard struggle the farmers had for the first few years they were on the land. Their standard of living, until they had made good, was not higher than that of an English agricultural labourer. Another point was the loneliness of their lives in the winter. This has been relieved now by the discovery of wireless, of the telephone and the production of very cheap motor cars; but at the time of our visit it was very acute. A medical officer told my wife that many of his women patients deliberately unpicked their dresses in the winter so that they might find something to do in sewing them up again; without this they were liable to go off their heads.

### Visit to Berlin, October 1910

In October 1910 my wife and I went to Berlin to attend the celebration of the centenary of the foundation of Berlin University, where I was to represent Cambridge University. Just as we were about to start, my wife discovered that the hood of my doctor's gown was much too old and shabby to be worn on such an august occasion, so a new one had to be procured. There was no time to undo the parcel, so it was thrust into my portmanteau just as it came. This led to trouble with the custom-house at the frontier, for the hood when folded up is a peculiar-looking object, and the official when he opened the parcel wanted to know what it was. This took some time to explain; then he wanted to know what it cost. Cambridge tailors do not send in the bill with the goods, so that I did not know, and this again took time to settle, and the result was that we very nearly missed the train. However, we arrived in Berlin safely, where we stayed with Professor and Mrs Warburg. Professor Warburg was the Director of the "Reichsanstalt", an institution for research in physics which had been founded by Werner Siemens at the suggestion of Helmholtz. It was the first of the laboratories of the type of the National Physical Laboratory at Teddington in England, or the Bureau of Standards at Washington, intended for researches which cannot conveniently be made in laboratories in universities, such as those which have to be extended over long periods, or which require very elaborate or expensive apparatus, or whose interest is mainly in their technical application, or for the comparison of different standards of physical quantities such as the ohm. Von Helmholtz was the first Director of the Reichsanstalt at Berlin and Professor Warburg was his successor.

The Commemoration began on the afternoon of Monday, October 10, with a religious service in the Dom Kirche. The music was magnificent but the building itself very disappointing.

The reception of the delegates on Tuesday was a very striking scene. The delegates in their academic robes of all colours were in the centre of the room, framed by the members of the various student corps in their uniforms, standing against the walls. There were several speeches and the proceedings closed with the singing of Gaudeamus igitur. In the afternoon at 3 o'clock there was a banquet to about 600 guests. Bethmann Hollweg (the Chancellor) was in the chair, with a prince on either side. After he had made a short speech, the loving-cup was passed round. He just took a sip and handed it to one of the princes, who treated it in quite another fashion. He threw his head back and drank and drank until it seemed as if he would never stop. At last he did, and then, holding the cup over the table, turned it upside down, and not a drop fell out.

The effect of this feat on the learned assembly was indescribable: they cheered, they shouted, they waved their napkins; some of them even stood on their chairs to do so more effectively. It was for all the world just like a "bump supper" after the boat-races in Cambridge.

There were several speeches, but these could not be called "after-dinner speeches", for there was one between each course. They were much more serious affairs than those in England. The speaker left his place and walked to a pulpit: when he had got into this, he took out a manuscript from his pocket and read steadily for about a quarter of an hour. Then he went back to his place at table and the next course was served. The only German I can remember who made a speech and did not read a lecture was the great classical scholar, Professor Wilamowitz-Mollendorff. Professor Mahaffy of Dublin, who replied for the British delegates, made a humorous speech in German and seemed to enjoy making it. One of my neighbours at dinner said with great surprise, "Why, he is laughing at his own jokes".

The result of these speeches was that, though we had commenced dinner at 3 o'clock, we had not finished it when we had to leave to attend a performance of Figaro at the Opera at 8, and this, which went on until 11, closed a very strenuous day.

On the next day there was a lecture in the morning and a garden party in the afternoon. We also saw a great number of Zeppelins, which were parked in a large field. Few of us, I think, had any idea that Germany had so many.

In the evening the students had a "Commers", which seems to have been somewhat uproarious. The supply of beer which was provided was on the scale of, I think, two gallons per student, but before 10 o'clock this had all been drunk, and there were hundreds of thirsty students clamouring for beer and not able to get it. There was a disturbance and some damage was done. When the Kaiser heard of this, he sent for some of the ringleaders next morning and rated them as a College tutor might rate an undergraduate who had got into a scrape, only he did it more effectively. He is reported to have said to them: "Why do you drink so much beer? Why don't you play games like English students do? If you did you would not be the disgusting-looking objects you are."

We left Berlin on the next day. There was a railway strike on in France, and though we started in the hope that we might be able to reach Calais, we could not do so and had to go to Ostend, and the crossing was very rough.

The working classes in Berlin evidently disliked the English at this time. One morning when my wife was out driving with our host's daughter, she happened to look back and saw some men shaking their fists at the carriage. On asking what was the reason, she was told, "Oh, they have recognised that you are an Englishwoman". In military circles the Kaiser himself came in for much criticism for not being sufficiently anti-English. The Crown Prince was their hero, who did not fail in this respect. I have never been able to believe that the Kaiser was responsible for the war. Unless the military party had changed greatly in the interval between 1910 and 1914, they wanted war and wanted it badly. Unfortunately they managed to get their way in the end, but I do not believe that the Kaiser was the instigator.
