# CHAPTER III

## Cambridge, 1879-1884

AFTER taking my degree I began the preparation of a dissertation to be sent in for the Fellowship Examination. The idea on which this was based had occurred to me before I came to Cambridge (see page 21), but I had not, while preparing for the Tripos, had time to develop it. It had to do with the nature of energy. According to the views then prevalent there were many different forms of energy. There was kinetic energy, that due to the motion of mass; potential energy, that due to the position of a body amid various surroundings; thermal energy, that possessed by a hot body in virtue of its temperature; electromagnetic energy, that in electric and magnetic fields; energy of chemical separation, that liberated when two different substances, e.g. coal and oxygen, combine and give out heat. Energy of one kind could be converted into that of another but there was always a fixed rate of exchange, e.g. if a certain amount of kinetic energy were converted by friction into heat, the thermal energy developed would be strictly proportional to the amount of kinetic energy lost; or, comparing different kinds of energy with different currencies, if all kinds were estimated on a gold standard the principle of the conservation of energy asserts that their total amount could not be altered by any physical process. The passage of energy from one form to another was called the transformation of energy.

The view that energy itself could be of quite different kinds had always seemed to me to lead to great difficulties when one tried to form a mental picture of what was going on when one kind of energy was transformed into another, and that a much simpler view was to suppose that energy was all of one kind and that the transformation of energy could be more appropriately described as a transference of energy from one system to another, the physical effects produced by the energy depending on the nature of the system in which it finds a home. My dissertation was of the view that all energy was kinetic energy. Very general methods for dealing with systems possessing only kinetic energy have been developed by Lagrange and Hamilton and are expressed by the Hamiltonian and Lagrangian Equations; my dissertation was the application of these, and especially the Lagrangian ones, to various problems in physics and chemistry. This led to interesting relations between various physical effects which must be true whatever may be the kind of mechanism which produces the effects. For example, if magnetising a bar of iron alters its length, altering its length will alter its magnetism, and if the amount of one of these effects is known, that of the other can be calculated. Again, if a property varies with the temperature, e.g. if the stiffness of a spring depends on its temperature, pulling out the spring will alter its temperature and the alteration in temperature will be such as to make it more difficult to pull it out. Thus if the spring is stiffer when it is cold than when it is hot, pulling out the spring will cool it, while if it is stiffer when hot than when cold, pulling it out will heat it. The general principle is that the alteration in temperature produced by any change in the system is that which will increase the resistance to that change. This principle was published independently and almost simultaneously by Le Chatelier.

The dissertation was published in an expanded form in two papers in the Transactions of the Royal Society, and was the foundation of my book Applications of Dynamics to Physics and Chemistry.

In those days candidates in mathematics for a Fellowship at Trinity, besides sending in a dissertation, had to take an examination in which there were two mathematical papers and another paper on a subject (not mathematical) chosen by themselves. I had a peculiar experience with regard to the subject I chose for this paper. My first choice was Marshall's Principles of Political Economy, as I thought that perhaps my mathematics might help in that; but when I found that on almost every page general laws in large print were stated on what seemed to me very insufficient evidence, I thought I had better try something else, so I changed over to Kant. I don't suppose I really understood it, but I enjoyed reading it and found it much more satisfactory than the Political Economy. I was fortunate enough to be elected to a Fellowship at my first attempt, to the great surprise of my tutor. In the interval between the end of the examination and the announcement of the result I met him in the Great Court and he said, "What are you doing here at this time of the year?" I said I had just been in for the Fellowship Examination. He said, "That is just like you, Thomson, never asking my advice. If you had come to me in the May Term I could have told you that there are two Senior Classics having their second try and a very strong Science candidate having his third and last, and there is not the slightest chance of their taking a candidate at his first try. You could then have enjoyed yourself in the Long Vacation instead of wasting your time over the Fellowship." I was, however, lucky enough to be elected.

In those days a Fellow did not enter into all his privileges and emoluments until he became a Master of Arts; he could not dine at the High Table and only received two thirds of a Fellow's dividend. To compensate for this the time he was a B.A. did not count in the seven years which was the tenure of a Fellowship.

The Bachelors of Arts, whether Fellows or not, dined together at a separate table called the "Bachelors' Table". This was managed by the Senior Bachelor, who was the Bachelor of highest seniority, a Bachelor Fellow being regarded as senior to all Bachelors who were not Fellows. The office involved a good deal of work, for the Senior Bachelor had each evening, with the assistance of the Head Waiter, to order the dinner for the next day. It involved also some financial responsibility, for he was responsible for the payment to the College kitchens of the expenses of the dinners; he was credited with a fixed sum for each dinner eaten by a Bachelor; but if the kitchen bill at the end of the term exceeded that allowance, he had to pay the difference. As I had got my Fellowship very early, I was Senior Bachelor for nearly two years, and on the whole found the work agreeable. It was difficult, however, for the Senior Bachelor to dine out as frequently as he might wish to do, for if he were absent the dinner was ordered by the Bachelor next in seniority, and as he had no financial responsibility he often ordered the things he liked best with little regard to their cost. One night's absence might require economies for several days to get this account straight. Though the Bachelors' Table still exists, the arrangements are quite different, and a Fellow dines at the High Table as soon as he is elected.

Soon after taking my degree, I lectured for three hours on three mornings of the week at Cavendish College, a college which had been founded to provide a place of residence for undergraduates younger than those usually admitted to the older Colleges. It was thought that perhaps one of the reasons why so few undergraduates went into business was because business men thought a start should be made earlier than the usual age for leaving Cambridge. The College, however, was not a success, and after a few years was given up. It is now under the name of Homerton College, a College for the training of women teachers.

I also took some private pupils; among the first was Austen Chamberlain, now Sir Austen Chamberlain, K.G., who came because, under the regulations then in force, no one could take a Tripos in any subject unless he passed a preliminary examination in mathematics. I remember his father coming to Cambridge about this time and asking how his son was getting on. When he was told that he was doing very well and was certain to pass, he said he was not surprised, for he had never had but one fault to find with Austen, and that was he was such an awful Radical. Another of my pupils at this time was Eldon Gorst, who subsequently became High Commissioner for Egypt; he was a candidate for the Mathematical Tripos and took a First Class in it. His motto was "Thorough". When he came back at the beginning of the term in which his Tripos took place, he mumbled so that it was only with the greatest difficulty I could make out what he was saying. I asked what was the matter, and he said that all his life he had suffered from toothache and was determined that he would not be hampered by it in the Tripos, and so had had every tooth in his head taken out; as his gums were not yet healed, the plate could not be put in, and so he could not articulate properly.

I think it helps any teacher to have had some experience of teaching pupils one by one; he realises what are the difficulties they meet with much more vividly than if he lectures to a class and only comes into contact with them through the written answers they send in to questions set in the lecture. I learnt, too, from my experience with these pupils, how greatly in most cases the concrete exceeds the abstract in the power of stimulating the mind and facilitating thought and work. One of my pupils came at the beginning of his third year with a very bad record. He was said to be idle, to take no interest in his work, and to have very little chance of getting through the Tripos. At first I agreed with this estimate, but we plodded on until we came to the subject of collisions between elastic spheres. I knew he was fond of billiards, and so I pointed out to him that the rules he used for playing certain shots at billiards followed at once from the mathematics. The result was marvellous. He had never before conceived that there was anything in mathematics that could interest any reasonable being. He now respected it, and began to work like a nigger: he was quite intelligent, and in the few months that were left before the Tripos he learnt enough to take quite a respectable place among the Senior Optimes. If it had not been for the billiards he would have been ploughed.

I was elected to an Assistant Lectureship in mathematics at Trinity College about two years after taking my degree. At this time the College were taking steps to remove the anomaly-to call it by no harsher name-that while all the candidates for the Mathematical Tripos paid fees to the College for lectures in mathematics, whether they attended them or not, they did all they could to avoid going to these lectures, and relied on private tuition for their teaching. The system proposed by the College was that the College Lecturers, in addition to giving lectures, should take men individually, help them with their difficulties and advise them as to their reading. I was elected on the understanding that I should take part in this work. It was optional for those who were already Lecturers. The result was that I had most of the Trinity men coming to me, and as I kept on with some men from other Colleges who were already reading with me, I had about eighteen hours a week of mathematical teaching. I was only at this work for about two years. In one Tripos I had taught five out of the first six men in the list. After saying this, I ought to acknowledge that in one Tripos, the very last man, the wooden spoon, was a pupil of mine.
I think, however, that this was the greatest teaching triumph I ever had, for he was quite unable to follow any kind of mathematical reasoning. He could, however, learn pieces of book work off by heart, but without understanding them. I made him write out over and over again every piece of book work that was at all likely to be set in the elementary part of the Tripos until he could do them without mistake. This, however, did not make him safe, for there was no certainty that he could write out the right piece of book work in answer to a particular question, if the wording of the question differed to an appreciable extent from that to which he was accustomed. The issue became almost one of probability: if you have a number of balls, each with different numbers, and throw them at random into an equal number of holes, each hole having a number corresponding to that on one of the balls, what is the chance that the number of balls which go into the right holes is not less than the number of questions you have to answer correctly to get through the examination? Fortunately he had good luck and so obtained an Honours degree in mathematics in Cambridge University.

Though eighteen hours a week spent in teaching may be thought to leave little time for research, I am strongly of opinion that in general some teaching should be combined with research, and that the teacher should not regard his teaching as negligible in importance compared with his research. There is no better way of getting a good grasp of your subject, or one more likely to start more ideas for research, than teaching it or lecturing about it, especially if your hearers know very little about it, and it is all to the good if they are rather stupid. You have then to keep looking at your subject from different angles until you find the one which gives the simplest outline, and this may give you new views about it and lead to further investigations. I believe, too, that new ideas come more freely if the mind does not dwell too long on one subject without interruption, but when the thread of one's thoughts is broken from time to time. It is, I think, a general experience that new ideas about a subject generally come when one is not thinking about it at the time, though one must have thought about it a good deal before. It is remarkable that when ideas come in this way they carry conviction with them, and depose without a struggle ideas which previously had seemed not unsatisfactory. The psychology of the incidence of ideas must be a very interesting subject.

## Status of Women Students

About the time I took my degree there were several burning questions before the University which led to a great many heated and in some cases bitter discussions. The first of these was compulsory Greek. At that time and until many years afterwards no one could take a degree unless he had passed an examination in Greek. This regulation was not an old one, for until 1822 Greek was not obligatory. By 1880 the number of undergraduates who had done no Greek before coming to the University had increased so greatly that the regulation had become very irksome, and did not result in these students acquiring any appreciable knowledge of either the language or the literature of Greece. They crammed it up for a few months before the examination from translations of the set books, which followed as nearly as possible the order of the words in the Greek text, and which had no literary value. This modicum of Greek was forgotten in less time than it had been learned. A Grace was submitted to the Senate in November 1880, proposing that Greek be no longer compulsory, but was rejected by 180 votes against 140. In January 1919 a similar Grace was proposed and passed without any opposition.
A subject which excited even more interest, and which the undergraduates seized upon as an opportunity for indulging in very elaborate "rags", was the proposal to admit students from Newnham and Girton to University Examinations, that they should have the right to sit for the various Honours Examinations, and the place they took in the examination should be published in the list issued by the Examiners. This would not, however, entitle them to a degree. As a matter of fact there had already been cases in which, by the courtesy of the Examiners, women had been allowed to take the papers and these had been marked. Their place in the Tripos was not published in the University list, but it was not kept secret. In my year Miss Scott, who afterwards became Professor of Mathematics in Bryn Mawr University, U.S.A., was examined in this way in the Mathematical Tripos and took a high place among the Wranglers. The place she had taken had leaked out, and when the official list, in which of course her name did not occur, was read out in the Senate House, there was such an outburst of cheering when that place was reached, that it drowned the name of the man in the official list.

There was a long and very animated discussion on the proposal in the Senate House, and for some days before the voting fly-leaves for and against the proposal were as thick as leaves in autumn. There was vigorous whipping-up on both sides and the non-residents came up in large numbers. The undergraduates took it up with great gusto: they paraded the streets, carrying banners inscribed with various sentiments, all, or nearly all, against the proposal. Figures supposed to represent women undergraduates in cap and gown were suspended across the streets. The proposal to allow women to take the Tripos papers and have their names published in the official list was carried by 398 to 366.

The victory for the women was due to the admirable way in which Newnham and Girton had been managed, and to the popularity of their principals, Miss Clough and Miss Bernard (afterwards Mrs Latham). When Newnham opened in 1871 in a small house in Panton Street, the earlier students were the pioneers of University education for women, and they had among them, as all pioneering bodies have, some who went their own way without troubling much about what people said about them. They dressed in the way that seemed to them best and did not follow the fashions. This made them conspicuous, exposed them to a good deal of ridicule, and hampered the progress of the movement for University education for women. To alter this without giving offence must have been a very delicate business, but Miss Clough was not only very charming and capable but also very tactful.

Whatever may have been the way she did it, she gradually reduced these eccentricities of dress until, at any rate to male eyes, they almost vanished. The popularity of Miss Clough and Miss Bernard induced some members of the Senate who did not believe in co-education in the abstract to say, if these ladies can turn out pupils like themselves it will be a very good thing, and we will give them a chance of doing it. No further steps were taken with regard to the position of women in the University until about the middle of the nineties, when a Syndicate was appointed to consider this question.
Head mistresses of schools therefore prefer a lettered staff, so that students of Newnham and Girton, since they could not put B.A. after their names, were at a disadvantage in obtaining appointments. Even if they had not to seek for employment it was a pardonable vanity which made them wish for some simple way of showing that they had passed a Tripos. The proposal, however, met with the most determined opposition.
The debate on it in the Senate House lasted for three days, and the report of the speeches occupied sixty-six pages of the Reporter. There was an avalanche of fly-sheets. The editor of the Cambridge Review took a postcard vote among undergraduates and resident B.A.s as to whether women should be admitted to the University (this, however, was not proposed by the Syndicate) and he sent out 2803 postcards and got 2160 replies, of which 466 were favourable and 1723 hostile. On the day of the voting there was a great influx of non-residents and the proposal was thrown out by the crushing majority of 1707 to 661.
It had been generally expected that the opposition would win, but not by so large a majority. After the voting there was much ragging and processions through the town, which lasted well into the night. It was an angry and unruly crowd. A model of a woman in cap and gown had been fixed on the railing in front of Newnham. The crowd got this down and burnt it in the Market Place.

I am very glad that the University did not finally decide this question in the heat of this controversy. In 1921 women were admitted to titular degrees and in 1947 to full membership of the University.

## Researches, 1880-1884

electric charge acting as a boundary. In fact it seemed that even if the vorticity did not suffice to represent matter, it might yet give a very useful representation of the electric field. The investigation of the problem set for the Adams Prize, like most problems in vortex motion, involved long and complicated mathematical analysis and took a long time. It yielded, however, some interesting results and ideas which I afterwards found valuable in connection with the theory of the structure of the atom, and also of that of the electric field. The essay was awarded the prize and was published in 1883 by Macmillan under the title A Treatise on the Motion of Vortex Rings. In the same year I gave, in a paper published in the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, the solution of the problem of finding the electrical oscillations which can occur on the surface of a conducting sphere.

I began to work in the Cavendish Laboratory immediately after taking my degree. I had not done so before, though I used to go to the laboratory now and then to see Poynting or Schuster, who were working there. I was not fortunate enough to meet Maxwell on any of these occasions: he was then editing the unpublished papers of Henry Cavendish, and not engaged on any regular research. Maxwell's view of the function of the laboratory was that it should be a place to which men who had taken the Mathematical Tripos could come, and, after a short training in making accurate measurements, begin a piece of original research. Most of the men who were working there when I first knew it were of this type. There was no organised teaching of undergraduates, though some lectures for candidates for the Natural Science Tripos and for medical students were given by the Demonstrator, William Garnett, afterwards Educational Adviser to the London County Council. He had been a candidate in the Mathematical Tripos when Maxwell was an Examiner, and had so impressed him by the soundness of his work on the physical questions that he made him his Demonstrator. No fees were charged for working in the laboratory. Maxwell's own lectures in the laboratory were not well attended. Indeed, in the last year the class consisted of an American and the eminent physicist who is now Sir Ambrose Fleming. I never heard Maxwell lecture in the laboratory, but I heard him in 1879 give the Rede Lecture in the Senate House on the Telephone. It was in the very early days of the telephone. The working of the telephone was demonstrated by an experiment in which a tune was played in the Geological Museum and heard in the Senate House: the distance between the buildings was less than twenty yards. It was a very pleasant lecture to listen to: there were many instances of that "pawky" humour which flashes out so often in his verses. The Vice-Chancellor was not very happy in proposing the vote of thanks. He said they were much indebted to Professor Maxwell, for he had helped them when they were in a great difficulty. They had asked everyone they could think of to be Rede Lecturer and they had all refused, and he did not know what would have happened if someone at the last moment had not suggested Professor Maxwell.

Maxwell died in 1879 and was succeeded by Lord Rayleigh, who began work in the Lent Term of 1880. The work of the laboratory was much extended; a scheme for instruction to undergraduates both in theoretical and practical work was organised. Glazebrook and Shaw were appointed Demonstrators, and to meet the cost of the apparatus required for these developments, Lord Rayleigh raised a sum of £1500. All the new developments prospered, and the number of undergraduates studying in the laboratory increased rapidly.

I began to work in the laboratory, in 1880, by attempting to detect the existence of some effects which I thought would follow from Maxwell's theory that changes in electric forces in a dielectric produced magnetic forces. The results I obtained were not sufficiently definite to allow any positive conclusions to be drawn from them, and I then took up a research suggested by Lord Rayleigh. It was on some effects produced in the working of induction coils by the electrostatic capacity of the primary and secondary of the induction coil. An account of the research was published in the Philosophical Magazine for July 1881. I then, again at the instance of Lord Rayleigh, began a much more difficult and lengthy research on the determination of the ratio of the electrostatic to the electromagnetic units of electric charge which ought, on Maxwell's theory, to be equal to the velocity of light; the work of previous observers showed that the difference was not great. About this time I was a candidate for the Chair of Applied Mathematics which had just been established at Owens College, but was not successful. This was not surprising as the successful candidate was Arthur Schuster, who, like myself, had been a student at the College, was already teaching there and doing it very successfully. In 1883 I was elected a University Lecturer and in that capacity lectured on electrostatics and electromagnetism in the academic year 1883-84. I also in the same year gave two courses of lectures at Trinity College, one on rigid dynamics and the other on statics and attractions, which were open to all members of the University. In the spring of 1884 I was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.

In the summer of 1884 Lord Rayleigh, who had stipulated when he accepted the Cavendish Professorship in 1879 that he must not be expected to hold it for more than five years, resigned the Professorship, and in December 1884 I was, to my great surprise and I think to that of everyone else, chosen as his successor. I remember hearing at the time that a well-known College tutor had expressed the opinion that things had come to a pretty pass in the University when mere boys were made Professors. I had sent in my name as a candidate without dreaming that I should be elected, and without serious consideration of the work and responsibility involved. When after my election I went into these, I was dismayed. I felt like a fisherman who with light tackle had casually cast a line in an unlikely spot and hooked a fish much too heavy for him to land. I felt the difficulty of following a man of Lord Rayleigh's eminence. I remembered that I had never given lectures at which experiments had to be performed, and that I had never taught any classes in practical physics. Happily my want of experience in this respect was made less harmful than it would otherwise have been by the kindness of Glazebrook and Shaw, who continued to take charge of the classes in practical physics which had been organised by them when Lord Rayleigh was Professor.
