# CHAPTER V

## Psychical Research

IN the nineties, at the instance of F. H. W. Myers, I attended a considerable number of seances at which abnormal physical effects were supposed to be produced. This was the only kind I went to see. I did not attend any demonstrations of thought transference, or those where the medium showed a knowledge of one's personal affairs which she could not have acquired by natural means. The results were very disappointing; at all but two of those I attended nothing whatever happened, and in the two where something did there were very strong reasons for suspecting fraud. The first of these was given by an American slate-writer, Eglinton, whose seances had received a good deal of attention from the Press. He claimed to be able to get messages written on slates under circumstances which precluded human agency. I went with Myers and Mr H. J. Hood, who at that time took a prominent part in psychical research, to his room, near, I think, to the Marble Arch. Eglinton took a slate which we were allowed to examine, and we found no reason to suspect that it was anything but an ordinary school slate. He then broke a small piece off a slate pencil, and placed the fragment on the top of the slate. We then sat down at a trestle table; he sat at one end, I held his right hand with my left, and with his left hand he held the slate under the table. The piece of slate pencil was between the bottom of the table and the top of the slate. The room was not darkened in any way and all the proceedings took place in broad daylight. He then asked each of us for a question which we should like the spirits to answer. Myers and Hood asked questions concerning spiritualism, I preferred a question to which I knew the answer, so I asked what county Manchester was in. We then sat for, I should think, a quarter of an hour without anything happening. Then he seemed to be seized with convulsions and it was all I could do to hold him up and prevent him from falling off the chair. He recovered in a short time, brought the slate from under the table, and on it was written in a sprawling hand with large ill-formed letters: Manchester. My view is that Eglinton thought there must be some catch in my very simple question, and that he knew that some English towns were counties in themselves and supposed, because I had asked the question, that Manchester was one of them. With regard to the way in which the writing was done; it is possible to write on a slate either in the usual way by keeping the slate fixed and moving the pencil, or, though with much greater difficulty, by keeping the pencil fixed and moving the slate. Thus, if he had managed to jam the piece of slate pencil in a crevice or depression on the lower part of the table, he might have been able to write without any considerable movement of the arm supporting the slate.

A much more exciting and interesting experience was one with Eusapia Palladino, an Italian peasant woman who had been discovered by Professor Richet, a celebrated French physiologist, and who had shown very remarkable powers of producing abnormal physical effects in a series of seances she had with Professor Richet and Sir Oliver Lodge in an island in the Mediterranean under conditions which made fraud seem very improbable. Eusapia came to Cambridge in the Long Vacation of 1895, and stayed with the Myers. She held some seances and I was present at two of them. At the first, which began about 6 o'clock in the evening, Lord Rayleigh, Professor Richet, Myers, Richard Hodgson, Mrs Sidgwick, Mrs Verrall and myself were present, along with a few others whose names I have forgotten. We sat at a long table. Eusapia was at one end, Lord Rayleigh on her right, I on her left; and Mrs Verrall was under the table holding her feet. There was a melon on a small table at some little distance from that at which we sat, and it was part of the programme that the melon should be precipitated on to the table. There were heavy velvet curtains over the windows, and when the lights were all put out it was pitch dark. We formed the circuit by clasping hands in the usual way, and sat like this for a considerable time without anything happening. Then Myers, who thought it good policy to encourage mediums at the commencement of a seance, jumped up and said he had been hit in the ribs. The circuit was thus broken and it was perhaps a minute before it was re-formed. Hardly had we got seated when Mrs Verrall called out "She's pulled her foot back", and then, without an interval, "Why, here's the melon on my head!" What had happened was quite obvious: while the circuit had been broken and Eusapia was free she had reached out, got the melon, sat down and put it on her lap, intending to kick it from her knee on to the table. Now if you want to kick from the knee you begin by drawing the foot back. Eusapia had done this, but had been disconcerted by Mrs Verrall calling out, and had not got her kick in in time, and the melon had rolled off her lap on to Mrs Verrall's head. She then set to work to retrieve the situation.

Very soon after we had sat down again she began abusing me in a language of which I did not understand one word, but Richet, who understood her, said she was accusing me of squeezing her hand and that she would not allow this. Instead of holding her hand, all she would permit was that I might put the tips of my fingers on the back of her hand; this was done. After a short interval she began to abuse Lord Rayleigh, and Richet said she was accusing him of squeezing her hand and that, instead of holding hands, she would put the tips of her fingers on the back of his hand. This change, as was found out later by Mr Hodgson, was the essence of her trick. She kept moving the hand I was touching backwards and forwards and I had to follow with my fingers. In this way she was able to make my fingers slip from the back of her hand either to her other hand or on to the back of Lord Rayleigh's. In this case she would get both hands free, for I should think that I was pressing Eusapia's hand when as a matter of fact I was pressing Rayleigh's, and he would think he was still being pressed by Eusapia while in fact he was pressed by me. If she slipped my fingers to the back of her other hand and not to Rayleigh's she would get one hand free. Certainly, soon after this change in the way of holding hands was made, the proceedings became very lively, chairs came down on the table with a bang, the table rose in the air; at any rate the end near me did. We were hit on the back and dug in the ribs, and this went on for what seemed several minutes. After this was over she showed us another phenomenon which, unlike the first, was done with a light in the room. It was not a very bright light, but good enough to enable us to distinguish people and the position of the furniture. There was a window at one end of the room covered with a heavy velvet curtain. She sat down on a chair a few feet away from this with her back towards it. She made no objection to my looking between the curtain and the chair to see if there was a string or connection of any kind between them. I did not detect any, but the light was not good enough to enable me to be certain that nothing was there. After we had been seated for a short time the curtain began to move and, looking like a sail full of wind, reached Eusapia and then slowly fell back. It did not look as if it had been pulled by a string, at any rate by a single string, for if so it would have been pointed like a jelly bag instead of being round like a sail. As she was to give another seance on the next evening, I went to the house in the morning and asked Myers if I might fit up an arrangement to make sure there was nothing between Eusapia and the curtain. He agreed at once. I fastened a string to the wall on one side of the window; it fell at first straight down, then passed along the floor between the curtain and where Eusapia sat, then went up to a pulley near the top of the wall on the other side of the window, and then to a place where the note-taker sat. The arrangement was that at a given signal the note-taker would pull in the string and if there was anything between the curtain and Eusapia it would be caught by the cord. The arrangement was not at all conspicuous unless you were close to it. This experiment proved a failure, for when we were assembled the next evening at the other end of the room before the lights were put out, Eusapia when she came in became very angry, went up to the curtain and pulled the string down. I have no satisfactory explanation of the way the curtain was moved, but I only saw it on one occasion and that for but two or three minutes, so that it is likely that I omitted to notice something which might have given the clue.

It ought to be said that Sir Oliver Lodge, Professor Richet and Dr. and Mrs Sidgwick observed Eusapia under much more favourable conditions at Professor Richet's house in an island near Hyeres, and that Sir Oliver is still of opinion that the effects observed there were genuine, and that the failure at Cambridge later was due to her having lost most of her power in the meantime and supplanting it by conjuring. The phenomenon of the bulging-out of curtains without any apparent connection with Eusapia, and when there was no wind also, occurred on the island. The explanation favoured by Lodge is that she had the power of thrusting out a sort of supplementary arm, which has mechanical qualities of pushing or pulling but which is not ordinary flesh and blood. This substance has been named ectoplasm. Lodge, on at least one occasion, thought he could see in the faint light a protuberance stretching out from Eusapia. It looked like a mere stump and not a hand. Within the last few years an Austrian medium, Rudi Schneider, has produced when in a trance phenomena similar to Eusapia's, including the bulging of curtains. Attempts have been made both in Paris and London to photograph the ectoplasm using the invisible infra-red rays, which can be used in the darkened room where these phenomena are supposed to occur. These experiments, however, have not led to any conclusive results. In the experiment in Paris it was thought that the ectoplasm produced an appreciable absorption of the infra-red rays, but in those in London, where infra-red photographs were taken with an apparatus designed by Lord Rayleigh, no effects which could be ascribed to ectoplasm were observed. I think that though physical instruments of very great delicacy have been used to detect physical effects produced by psychical means, they have as yet not given any evidence of their existence. Perhaps this is hardly to be wondered at. The people who claim to produce them are very psychic and impressionable, and it may be as unreasonable to expect them to produce their effects when surrounded by men of science armed with delicate instruments, as it would for a poet to be expected to produce a poem while in the presence of a Committee of the British Academy.

Again, the delicate instruments used in physical laboratories may, until their technique has been mastered, give one result one day and a contradictory one the next, and illustrate the truth of Coutts Trotter's saying that the law of the constancy of Nature was never learned in a physical laboratory. The most complicated physical apparatus is simplicity itself compared with a human being. I have described the only two cases in which anything happened that was claimed to be psychical. One of my most interesting experiences was a seance when nothing at all happened. This was given in Mr Oscar Browning's rooms in King's College, Cambridge, near the end of last century by Madame Blavatsky, a very prominent theosophist of the time. She said at the beginning that her Mahatma in Tibet would precipitate a message, a cushion and a bell, and we sat waiting for, I should think, more than an hour, and nothing whatever arrived. The medium was not in the least abashed. She took the offensive, said it was all our fault, that our scepticism had created an atmosphere impenetrable to anything spiritual. She was a short and stout woman with an amazingly strong personality, very able and an excellent speaker. So well did she speak that she convinced the great majority of the audience that the failure was their fault, and they went away thoroughly ashamed of themselves for having spoiled what would otherwise have been a most interesting experience.

### Telepathy

Another branch of psychical research which may be connected with physics is that of thought-reading or telepathy, especially that between people not far from each other. The first experiments published on this subject were made in 1884 on girls employed in a draper's shop in Liverpool. These were tested in the physical laboratory at Liverpool University by Sir Oliver Lodge, and he satisfied himself that they, when blindfolded and when precautions were taken against the use of a code of signals, could describe, and in some cases give a rough copy, of a drawing made in sight of the rest of the audience and therefore presumably in their thoughts. Compared with other branches of psychical research, little has been done on this short-range thought transference between living people, though it was this which first suggested the idea. One reason for this is that this power of thought reading is exceedingly rare, very much rarer than was at first supposed. Another reason is that attention was at first directed to thought transference between the living and the dead, which raises much deeper and more important questions. In my opinion the investigation of short-range thought transference is of the highest importance. It is quite possible, indeed very probable, that it may turn out to be of an entirely different character from the kind of thought transference that is supposed to occur in dreams or premonitions. This does not seem to be influenced by distance, whereas one would be very much surprised if that between living people did not decrease rapidly as the distance between them increased. I think it is now recognised that it is much more difficult than was then thought to guard against the use of a code. The Zancigs, who were performing in London some years ago, did not, I believe, profess to possess any psychic power. Yet I saw them at a private house give, under most stringent conditions imposed on them by the present Lord Rayleigh (conditions which I expect were even more stringent than those imposed in the experiment of fifty years ago), an exhibition which, if they had professed to be thought readers, might have been held to establish the claim.

There are other ways of communication between two people than by sight or audible sounds. There is such a thing as inaudible sound. If the pitch of a musical note is raised above a certain point it ceases to be audible. The pitch at which this occurs varies from one person to another, and some people are able to hear notes of a pitch so high that they are quite inaudible to the vast majority of people. I once saw a very striking instance of this at the Cavendish Laboratory. A boy, who is now a distinguished musician, came to the Laboratory to have the limiting pitch he could hear tested by Galton's whistle. This is a whistle whose pitch can be altered continuously through a wide range. He beat the instrument, for we could not produce a note of high enough pitch to be beyond his hearing. There were several people present, some of them young students-and the power of detecting high notes is much stronger in youth than in age-and none of them had heard anything for a long time before the whistle reached its highest note. Now if one of the parties in a performance like the Zancigs possessed this power to a quite exceptional extent, all that the other one would need to communicate with her by a code would be a very small whistle which could easily be concealed. The chances of anyone else hearing the signal would be small. I do not for a moment suggest that the Zancigs did the trick in this way. I have no idea how they did it.

In my opinion by far the most important experiments of this kind were those made by Professor Gilbert Murray in 1916. In these there could be no question of the use of a code or of the good faith of any of the participants. An account of these is given by Mrs Sidgwick in Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, vol. 34, p. 212. The participants in these experiments were either members of Professor Murray's family or intimate friends. The experiments were made in private houses and not in a laboratory. This has the advantage that the thought reader was working under conditions much less formal and much more normal, and less likely to affect his powers, than if the experiments had been made in a laboratory.[^1] Professor Murray says the method followed is this: "I go out of the room and of course out of earshot. Someone in the room thinks of a scene or an incident or anything she likes and says it aloud. It is written down and I am called. I come in, usually take my daughter's hand, and then if I have luck, describe in detail what she has thought of. The least disturbance of our customary method, change of time or place, presence of strangers, controversy and especially noise is apt to make things go wrong."

Professor Murray himself does not believe that the results he gets are due to telepathy, if by that is meant the transmission of thought without aid from the ordinary senses, hearing, sight, touch, etc. As I understand him, he believes he gets into a state when he is peculiarly sensitive to noise, and his hearing becomes so acute that he hears something of the conversation between the "thinkers" when they are settling the subject they are to think about. It is not so acute, however, that he can distinguish the words they say, but he hears enough to suggest something to him. If it were a question of acuteness of hearing alone a powerful microphone might be as effective as Professor Murray. The process is easier to describe, and the principle is the same, if we suppose the subject was chosen by writing instead of talking, and that the thought reader was in a condition when his sight was abnormally acute, though not sufficiently so to enable him to fix definitely what a particular word was. It might, however, be sufficient for him to see that only a few words would be consistent with what he had seen. If he had a quick imagination he might quickly grasp these possibilities and, beginning with one of them, if he found from observation of the thinkers that he was on the wrong track, start one of the others and go on until he got the right one.

It is clear that if this were the process the percipient would have a much better chance of success if, as in this case, the thinkers were either members of his family or intimate friends with whose special interests in literature, history or politics, as well as incidents in their lives, he was well acquainted.

The subjects selected by the thinkers seem to have been chosen at random, without reference to their suitability for distinguishing between the psychic explanation and the one favoured by Professor Murray. There are some of the experiments which seem, at first sight at any rate, to be inconsistent with his view, but it would be possible to find subjects which would test this view more severely than those actually used.

Many efforts have been made to discover possessors of this power of short-distance telepathy, both in this country and in America, but they seem to be exceedingly rare. The case of Professor Murray shows, however, that few though they may be, there are some, and it is in my opinion most important that the search for those should not be dropped. It is often asserted that telepathy has been conclusively proved. I cannot agree with this for the case of short-range telepathy. I think the utmost that can be claimed is the Scottish verdict-not proven. This does not mean that it has been shown not to exist. The subject is one of transcendent importance. I agree with the late Lord Rayleigh, who in his Presidential Address to the Society for Psychical Research, given very shortly before his death, said, "To my mind telepathy with the dead would present comparatively little difficulty when it is admitted as regards the living. If the apparatus of the senses is not used in one case, why should it be needed in the other?"

### Water-Dowsing

The phenomenon of water-dowsing, which borders on the occult, would seem at first sight one which could be more easily investigated than thought transference between living people. For there are a considerable number of people-in fact there is a Society of Dowsers-whose good faith is beyond question, who suffer a strange experience when they walk over ground under which a stream of water is flowing. The most usual form of this is that when they hold a forked twig, generally a hazel one, with one branch of the fork in the right hand and the other in the left, the straight part is violently deflected when they are passing over running water. It seems necessary that the water should be underground, for few, if any, cases are recorded of this sensation being felt when crossing a bridge over a running stream. Some dowsers say that the twig will move when held by someone else provided they place their hands on his shoulders. There are some who can detect water without using the rod, since they experience peculiar sensations when they are in places where the rod would move. The rod may be a convenient indicator of a physiological effect. There is no doubt of the reality of the dowsing effect. In fact, in many agricultural districts the dowser is the man they call in when they want to find the right place to dig a well, and he very often succeeds. We had an example of this at Trinity College. The water supply to one of our farms was very defective and a new well badly wanted. At first the Senior Bursar, who was a Fellow of the Royal Society, proceeded in the orthodox way and employed eminent geologists to report on where we ought to sink a well. Their advice, however, did not lead to the discovery of any water. Our land agent said, "If I were you, I would try old X, who has found a good many wells in this county and who will sink the well on the terms 'no water, no pay' ". As there seemed nothing else to be done, the Bursar employed him and he found water. For this we were assailed in an article in Nature, which lamented that Trinity College-the College of Newton-should have given countenance to such superstitious and unscientific practices.

Although I think most of the people who have paid any attention to the subject believe in the reality of dowsing, there is no agreement about its cause.

The common-sense view would be that, since underground water would produce some effect on the vegetation on the surface above it, a man who had good powers of observation and long experience, might be able to detect water by small differences in the herbage which would escape the notice of the ordinary observer, and that the movement of the rod came after the discovery and not before. This was the method of the Abbe Paramelle, a most successful discoverer of springs, who claims that in the twenty-five years between 1829 and 1854 he had located more than 10,000 springs; and that between 8000 and 9000 wells had been dug of which over 95 per cent were successful. He did not use the divining-rod and spent all his time, except on Sundays, looking for water. This may be the method in some cases but it certainly is not so in all. In some cases the movements of the rod occur when the dowser has been blindfolded, or when he has not been near the part of the country before. In this connection it may be pertinent to say that in the early days of radio-activity at the beginning of this century, I examined specimens of water freshly drawn from a good many wells in different parts of England and found that they all, though in very different degrees, contained the radio-active emanation from radium. This only retains its activity for four days, so that if the water were stagnant it would soon lose its radio-activity. Thus, if this were connected with the effect produced on the dowser, it would explain why it is that he can only detect running water. If inhaling a small quantity of radium emanation produced in the dowser rigors such as are produced by some drugs, his fingers when over the water might close with a convulsive clutch on the forks of the twig and require a large force to keep the rod in position. I must, however, confess that though I have often inhaled the emanation I have never observed that it produced the slightest effect upon me; but I am not a dowser.

One amusing thing about the tests of the waters from these wells was that by far the most radio-active was that from a well-known brewery. When I reported this to them I at once received instructions that I was not on any account to publish it, for if I did nobody would ever buy their beer. When I told this to an American friend he said it illustrated the difference between the business methods in the two countries, for if it had been an American brewery, the whole country would have been placarded with advertisements-"Drink Smith's Radio Beer".

The early history of the "divining-rod" does not inspire us with much confidence. Its first applications were to the detection of criminals, metals and lost treasure and not to the discovery of water. Aymar, a French dowser, created a great sensation in 1692 by tracking down by the divining-rod the murderer of a man and his wife. He claimed that when he placed his foot on anything which had been touched by the criminal the rod moved, his temperature rose, his heart beat more rapidly and he felt faint. These sensations were only produced by murderers; thieves, metals, or water left him unmoved. The divining-rod was used to discover metals in Germany (Dousterswivel in The Antiquary was a German), Austria and Cornwall. In this country attention has been mainly concentrated on water-divining, though some of the most successful water-diviners have claimed to be able to detect metals as well. Thus it is stated that John Mullins, a very celebrated water-diviner and well-sinker, when a sovereign had been placed under each of three stones in a row of ten in a road, passed his rod over the stones. When he came to a stone and the rod did not move he said, "Nothing here", but if it did move, he lifted the stone, took the sovereign and said, "Thankee, Master". This is an experiment that could easily be tried. There are some dowsers who claim to be able not merely to detect metals but to be able to tell what the metal is. The most unexpected application of the divining-rod I have come across is a medical one. I have met a dowser who told me that, before taking a bottle of medicine, he passed the rod over it and if the rod were deflected he knew the medicine would do him good and he took it, while if the rod were not deflected he knew the medicine would be of no use for his complaint.

The greater number of experiments with the divining-rod have been made for the purpose of obtaining water and not for discovering the way in which the effects of the rod are produced. The object has been commercial rather than scientific.

In Barrett's Divining Rod, p. 256, an account is made of an experiment made to detect hidden coins by the divining-rod, which was successful, though there were one or two incidents which might arouse suspicion.

The divining-rod is perhaps of all phenomena which may be thought to be psychical, the one most favourable for experiment. The motion of the rod is a mechanical effect and gives an indication of the magnitude of the phenomenon. The conditions under which the effect occurs can be made definite, and there is no lack of trustworthy people who possess the dowsing power: for these reasons I think such experiments are well worth making.[^1]

[^1]: Since the above was written, I have seen a paper by Mr H. M. Budgett, published by the British Society of Dowsers, on the connection between effects on a divining rod and the readings of an instrument designed to detect very penetrating radiation. There seemed to be indications of some connection, but these were very faint. It would be interesting to see if the dowser could, by his divining, detect a strong beam of penetrating gamma rays.
