# Chapter XVIII

# The Electromagnetic Theory of Light

## Velocity of Light in Different Media.

**589.** It has been seen that, on the electromagnetic theory of light, the propagation of waves of light in vacuo ought to take place with a velocity equal, within limits of experimental error, to the actual observed velocity of light. A further test can be applied to the theory by examining whether the observed and calculated velocities are in agreement in media other than the free ether.

According to the electromagnetic theory, if $V$ is the velocity in any medium, and $V_0$ the velocity in free ether, we ought to have the relation

$$
\frac{V}{V_0}=\frac{1}{\sqrt{K\mu}}\Big/\frac{1}{\sqrt{K_0\mu_0}},
$$

where $K_0$, $\mu_0$ refer to free ether.

For free ether and all media which will be considered, we may take $\mu=1$. Also if $\nu$ is the refractive index for a plane wave of light passing from free ether to any medium, we have from optical theory the relation

$$
\frac{V_0}{V}=\nu,
$$

so that, according to the electromagnetic theory, the refractive index of any medium ought to be connected with its inductive capacity by the relation

$$
\nu=\sqrt{\frac{K}{K_0}}.
$$

One difficulty appears at once. According to this equation there ought to be a single definite refractive index for each medium, whereas the phenomenon of dispersion shows that the refractive index of any medium varies with the wave-length of the light. It is easy to trace this difficulty to its source. The phenomenon of dispersion is supposed to arise from the periodic motion of charged electrons associated with the molecules of the medium, whereas the theoretical value which has been obtained for the velocity of light has been deduced on the supposition that the medium is uncharged at every point (§ 577). It is only when the light is of infinite wave-length that the effect of the motion of the electrons disappears. Thus according to the electromagnetic theory the value of $\sqrt{K/K_0}$ ought to be identical with the refractive index for light of infinite wave-length. Unfortunately it is not possible to measure the refractive index with accuracy except for visible light.

**590.** In the following table, the values of $\sqrt{K/K_0}$ are mean values taken from the table already given on p. 132 of the inductive capacities of gases. The values of $\nu$ refer to sodium light.

| Gas | Mean $\sqrt{K/K_0}$ | $\nu$ observed | Authority | Mean $\nu$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Hydrogen | 1.000132 | 1.0001387; 1.000132 | 1; 2 | 1.000135 |
| Air | 1.000294 | 1.0002927; 1.000293 | 1; 2 | 1.000293 |
| Carbon Monoxide | 1.000346 | 1.0003350 | 1 | 1.000335 |
| Carbon Dioxide | 1.000482 | 1.000449; 1.000451 | 3; 2 | 1.000450 |
| Nitrous Oxide | 1.000541 | 1.0005151; 1.000503 | 1; 3 | 1.000509 |
| Ethylene | 1.000692 | 1.000720; 1.000678 | 1; 2 | 1.000699 |

Authorities: 1. Mascart. 2. G. W. Walker (*Phil. Trans.* A. 201, p. 435). 3. Preston (*Theory of Light*, p. 137).

From this it will be seen that for these substances there is quite good agreement between theory and experiment, in spite of the failure of the theory to take all the facts into account. In the case of vapours the agreement is much less good, and for many solids and liquids there is no agreement at all. For instance, the observed inductive capacity of water varies from 75 to 81, while the value of $\nu$ is 1.33.

## Waves of Light in Non-conducting Media.

### Solution of Differential Equation for Plane Waves.

**591.** The equation of wave propagation

$$
\frac{d^2\chi}{dt^2}=a^2\nabla^2\chi
$$

has, as a particular solution,

$$
\chi=Ae^{i\kappa(lx+my+nz-at)} \qquad (547)
$$

provided $l^2+m^2+n^2=1$. This value of $\chi$ is a complex quantity of which the real and imaginary parts separately must be solutions of the original equation. Thus we have the two solutions

$$
\chi=A\cos \kappa(lx+my+nz-at) \qquad (548)
$$

$$
\chi=A\sin \kappa(lx+my+nz-at).
$$

Either of these two solutions represents the propagation of a plane wave. The direction-cosines of the direction of propagation are $l$, $m$, $n$, and the velocity of propagation is $a$. Usually it will be found simplest to take the value of $\chi$ given by equation (547) as the solution of the equation and reject imaginary terms after the analysis is completed. This procedure will be followed throughout the present chapter; it will of course give the same result as would be obtained by taking equation (548) as the solution of the differential equation.

### Propagation of a Plane Wave.

**592.** Let us now consider in detail the propagation of a plane wave of light, the direction of propagation being taken, for simplicity, to be the axis of $x$. The values of $X$, $Y$, $Z$, $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$ must all be solutions of the differential equation, each being of the form

$$
\chi=Ae^{i\kappa(x-at)} \qquad (549)
$$

The six values of $X$, $Y$, $Z$, $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$ are not independent, being connected by the six equations of § 574, namely

$$
\frac{K}{C}\frac{dX}{dt}=\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial z},\quad
\frac{K}{C}\frac{dY}{dt}=\frac{\partial\alpha}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial x},\quad
\frac{K}{C}\frac{dZ}{dt}=\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial\alpha}{\partial y} \qquad (A)
$$

$$
-\frac{\mu}{C}\frac{d\alpha}{dt}=\frac{\partial Z}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial Y}{\partial z},\quad
-\frac{\mu}{C}\frac{d\beta}{dt}=\frac{\partial X}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial Z}{\partial x},\quad
-\frac{\mu}{C}\frac{d\gamma}{dt}=\frac{\partial Y}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial X}{\partial y} \qquad (B)
$$

From the form of solution, equation (549), it is clear that all the differential operators may be replaced by multipliers. We may put

$$
\frac{d}{dt}=-i\kappa a,\qquad \frac{\partial}{\partial x}=i\kappa,\qquad \frac{\partial}{\partial y}=\frac{\partial}{\partial z}=0.
$$

The equations now become

$$
X=0,
$$

$$
\frac{Ka}{C}Y=-\gamma,\qquad \frac{Ka}{C}Z=\beta \qquad (A')
$$

$$
\alpha=0,
$$

$$
\frac{\mu a}{C}\beta=Z,\qquad \frac{\mu a}{C}\gamma=-Y \qquad (B').
$$

Since $X=0$, $\alpha=0$, it appears that both the electric and magnetic forces are, at every instant, at right angles to the axis of $x$, i.e. to the direction of propagation. From the last two equations of system (A') we obtain

$$
\beta Y+\gamma Z=0,
$$

showing that the electric force and the magnetic force are also at right angles to one another.

On comparing the results obtained from the electromagnetic theory of light with those obtained from physical optics, it is found that the wave of light which we have been examining is a plane-polarised ray whose plane of polarisation is the plane containing the magnetic force and the direction of propagation. Thus the magnetic force is in the plane of polarisation, while the electric force is at right angles to this plane.

### Conditions at a Boundary between Two Different Media.

**593.** Let us next consider what happens when a wave meets a boundary between two different dielectric media 1, 2. Let the suffix 1 refer to quantities evaluated in the first medium, and the suffix 2 to quantities evaluated in the second. For simplicity let us suppose the boundary to coincide with the plane of $yz$.

At the boundary, the conditions to be satisfied are (§§ 137, 467):

1. the tangential components of electric force must be continuous,
2. the normal components of electric polarisation must be continuous,
3. the tangential components of magnetic force must be continuous,
4. the normal components of magnetic induction must be continuous.

Analytically, these conditions are expressed by the equations

$$
K_1X_1=K_2X_2,\qquad Y_1=Y_2,\qquad Z_1=Z_2 \qquad (550)
$$

$$
\mu_1\alpha_1=\mu_2\alpha_2,\qquad \beta_1=\beta_2,\qquad \gamma_1=\gamma_2 \qquad (551)
$$

It will be at once evident that these six equations are not independent: if the last two of equations (550) are satisfied, then the first of equations (551) is necessarily satisfied also as a consequence of the relation

$$
-\frac{\mu}{C}\frac{d\alpha}{dt}=\frac{\partial Z}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial Y}{\partial z}
$$

being satisfied in each medium, while similarly, if the last two of equations (551) are satisfied, then the first of equations (550) is necessarily satisfied. Thus there are only four independent conditions to be satisfied at the boundary, and each of these must be satisfied for all values of $y$, $z$, and $t$. It is most convenient to suppose the four boundary conditions to be the continuity of $Y$, $Z$, $\beta$, $\gamma$.

## Reflection and Refraction.

### Refraction of a Wave Polarised in Plane of Incidence.

**594.** Let us now imagine a wave of light to be propagated through medium (1), and to meet the boundary, this wave being supposed polarised in the plane of incidence. Let the boundary, as before, be the plane of $yz$, and let the plane of incidence be supposed to be the plane of $xy$. Since the wave is supposed to be polarised in the plane of incidence, the magnetic force must be in the plane of $xy$, and the electric force must be parallel to the axis of $z$. Hence for this wave, we may take

$$
X=Y=0,
$$

$$
Z=Z'e^{i\kappa_1(x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)},
$$

$$
\alpha=\alpha'e^{i\kappa_1(x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)},
$$

$$
\beta=\beta'e^{i\kappa_1(x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)},\qquad \gamma=0,
$$

and it is found that the six equations (A), (B) of p. 527 are satisfied if we have,

$$
\frac{\alpha'}{\sin\theta_1}=-\frac{\beta'}{\cos\theta_1}=\frac{Z'}{\sqrt{\mu_1/K_1}} \qquad (552)
$$

The angle $\theta_1$ is seen to be the angle of incidence of the wave, namely, the angle between its direction of propagation and the normal ($Ox$) to the boundary.

Let us suppose that in the second medium there is a refractive wave, given by

$$
X=Y=0,
$$

$$
Z=Z''e^{i\kappa_2(x\cos\theta_2+y\sin\theta_2-V_2t)},
$$

$$
\alpha=\alpha''e^{i\kappa_2(x\cos\theta_2+y\sin\theta_2-V_2t)},
$$

$$
\beta=\beta''e^{i\kappa_2(x\cos\theta_2+y\sin\theta_2-V_2t)},\qquad \gamma=0,
$$

where, in order that the equations of propagation may be satisfied, we must have

$$
\frac{\alpha''}{\sin\theta_2}=-\frac{\beta''}{\cos\theta_2}=\frac{Z''}{\sqrt{\mu_2/K_2}} \qquad (553)
$$

It will be found on substitution in the boundary equations (550) and (551) that the presence of an incident and refracted wave is not sufficient to enable these equations to be satisfied. The equations can, however, all be satisfied if we suppose that in the first medium, in addition to the incident wave, there is a reflected wave given by

$$
X=Y=0,
$$

$$
Z=Z'''e^{i\kappa_3(x\cos\theta_3+y\sin\theta_3-V_1t)},
$$

$$
\alpha=\alpha'''e^{i\kappa_3(x\cos\theta_3+y\sin\theta_3-V_1t)},
$$

$$
\beta=\beta'''e^{i\kappa_3(x\cos\theta_3+y\sin\theta_3-V_1t)},\qquad \gamma=0,
$$

where, in order that the equations of propagation may be satisfied, we must have

$$
\frac{\alpha'''}{\sin\theta_3}=\frac{\beta'''}{-\cos\theta_3}=\frac{Z'''}{\sqrt{\mu_1/K_1}} \qquad (554)
$$

The boundary conditions must be satisfied for all values of $y$ and $t$. Since $y$ and $t$ enter only through exponentials in the different waves, this requires that we have

$$
\kappa_1\sin\theta_1=\kappa_2\sin\theta_2=\kappa_3\sin\theta_3 \qquad (555)
$$

$$
\kappa_1V_1=\kappa_2V_2=\kappa_3V_1 \qquad (556)
$$

From (556) we must have $\kappa_1=\kappa_3$, and hence from (555), $\sin\theta_1=\sin\theta_3$. Since $\theta_1$ and $\theta_3$ must not be identical, we must have $\theta_1=\pi-\theta_3$. Thus the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection.

We further have, from equations (555) and (556),

$$
\frac{\sin\theta_1}{\sin\theta_2}=\frac{V_1}{V_2}=\nu \qquad (557)
$$

where $\nu$ is the index of refraction on passing from medium 1 to medium 2, so that the sine of the angle of incidence is equal to $\nu$ times the sine of the angle of refraction.

Thus the geometrical laws of reflection and refraction can be deduced at once from the electromagnetic theory. These laws can, however, be deduced from practically any undulatory theory of light. A more severe test of a theory is its ability to predict rightly the relative intensities of the incident, reflected and refracted waves, and this we now proceed to examine.

**595.** The only boundary conditions to be satisfied are the continuity, at the boundary, of $Z$ and $\beta$ (cf. § 593). Thus we must have

$$
Z'+Z'''=Z'' \qquad (558)
$$

$$
\beta'+\beta'''=\beta'' \qquad (559)
$$

On substituting from equations (552), (553) and (554), the last relation becomes

$$
\sqrt{\frac{K_1}{\mu_1}}\cos\theta_1\,(Z'-Z''')=\sqrt{\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}}\cos\theta_2\,Z'' \qquad (560)
$$

so that all the boundary conditions are satisfied if

$$
\frac{Z'}{1+u}=\frac{Z''}{2}=\frac{Z'''}{1-u} \qquad (561)
$$

where

$$
u^2=\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}\frac{\mu_1}{K_1}\frac{\cos^2\theta_2}{\cos^2\theta_1} \qquad (562)
$$

For all media in which light can be propagated, we may take $\mu=1$, so that

$$
u=\sqrt{\frac{K_2}{K_1}\frac{\cos\theta_2}{\cos\theta_1}}=\frac{\sin\theta_1}{\sin\theta_2}\frac{\cos\theta_2}{\cos\theta_1}=\frac{\tan\theta_1}{\tan\theta_2} \qquad (563)
$$

Thus the ratio of the amplitude of the reflected to the incident ray is

$$
\frac{Z'''}{Z'}=\frac{1-u}{1+u}=\frac{\tan\theta_2-\tan\theta_1}{\tan\theta_2+\tan\theta_1}=\frac{\sin(\theta_2-\theta_1)}{\sin(\theta_2+\theta_1)} \qquad (564)
$$

This prediction of the theory is in good agreement with experiment. This being so, the predicted ratio of $Z''/Z'$ is necessarily in agreement with experiment, since both in theory and experiment the energy of the incident wave must be equal to the sum of the energies of the reflected and refracted waves.

### Total Reflection.

**596.** We have seen, equation (557), that the angle $\theta_2$ is given by

$$
\sin\theta_2=\frac{1}{\nu}\sin\theta_1,
$$

where $\nu$ is the index of refraction for light passing from medium 1 to medium 2. If $\nu$ is less than unity, the value of $\frac{1}{\nu}\sin\theta_1$ may be either greater or less than unity according as $\theta_1>\sin^{-1}\nu$. In the former case $\sin\theta_2$ is greater than unity, so that the value of $\theta_2$ is imaginary.

This circumstance does not affect the value of the foregoing analysis in a case in which $\theta_1>\sin^{-1}\nu$, but the geometrical interpretation no longer holds. Let us denote $\frac{1}{\nu}\sin\theta_1$ by $p$, and $\sqrt{p^2-1}$ by $q$. Then in the analysis we may replace $\sin\theta_2$ by $p$, and $\cos\theta_2$ by $iq$, both $p$ and $q$ being real quantities. The exponential which occurs in the refracted wave is now

$$
e^{i\kappa_2(x\cos\theta_2+y\sin\theta_2-V_2t)}=e^{i\kappa_2(iqx+py-V_2t)}=e^{-\kappa_2qx}e^{i\kappa_2(py-V_2t)}.
$$

Thus the refracted wave is propagated parallel to the axis of $y$, i.e. normal to the boundary, and its magnitude decreases proportionally to the factor $e^{-\kappa_2qx}$. At a small distance from the boundary the refracted wave becomes imperceptible.

Algebraically, the values of $Z'$, $Z''$, and $Z'''$ are still given by equations (561), but we now have

$$
u=\sqrt{\frac{K_2\mu_1}{\mu_2K_1}\frac{\cos\theta_2}{\cos\theta_1}}=i\sqrt{\frac{K_2\mu_1}{\mu_2K_1}\frac{q}{\cos\theta_1}}=iv,
$$

so that $u$ is an imaginary quantity, say $u=iv$, and, from equations (561),

$$
\frac{Z'''}{Z'}=\frac{1-u}{1+u}=\frac{1-iv}{1+iv}.
$$

Since $v$ is real, we have

$$
\left|\frac{1-iv}{1+iv}\right|=1,
$$

so that we may take

$$
Z'''=Z'e^{i\chi},
$$

where

$$
\chi=\arg\left(\frac{1-iv}{1+iv}\right)=-2\tan^{-1}v.
$$

In the reflected wave, we now have

$$
Z=Z'''e^{i\kappa_1(-x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)}=Z'e^{i\kappa_1(-x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)-2\tan^{-1}v}.
$$

Comparing with the incident wave,

$$
Z=Z'e^{i\kappa_1(x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)},
$$

we see that reflection is now accompanied by a change of phase $-2\kappa\tan^{-1}v$, but the amplitude of the wave remains unaltered, as obviously it must from the principle of energy.

### Refraction of a Wave Polarised Perpendicular to Plane of Incidence.

**597.** The analysis which has been already given can easily be modified so as to apply to the case in which the polarisation of the incident wave is perpendicular to the plane of incidence. All that is necessary is to interchange corresponding electric and magnetic quantities: we then have an incident wave in which the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane of incidence, and this is what is required.

Clearly all the geometrical laws which have already been obtained will remain true without modification, and the analysis of § 591, total reflection, will also hold without modification.

Formula (563), giving the amplitude of the reflected ray, will, however, require alteration. We have, as in equation (564), for the ratio of the amplitudes of the incident and reflected rays,

$$
\frac{\gamma'''}{\gamma'}=\frac{1-u}{1+u} \qquad (565)
$$

but the value of $u$, instead of being given by equation (563), must now be supposed to be given by

$$
u^2=\frac{\mu_2}{K_2}\frac{K_1}{\mu_1}\frac{\cos^2\theta_2}{\cos^2\theta_1},
$$

this equation being obtained by the interchange of electric and magnetic terms in equation (562). Taking $\mu_2=\mu_1=1$, we obtain

$$
u=\sqrt{\frac{K_1}{K_2}\frac{\cos\theta_2}{\cos\theta_1}}=\frac{\sin\theta_2\cos\theta_2}{\sin\theta_1\cos\theta_1}=\frac{\sin2\theta_2}{\sin2\theta_1},
$$

whence, from equation (565),

$$
\frac{\gamma'''}{\gamma'}=\frac{\tan(\theta_2-\theta_1)}{\tan(\theta_2+\theta_1)} \qquad (566)
$$

giving the ratio of the amplitudes of the incident and reflected waves. This result also agrees well with experiment.

**598.** We notice that if $\theta_1+\theta_2=90^\circ$, then $\gamma'''=0$. Thus there is a certain angle of incidence such that no light is reflected. Beyond this angle $\gamma'''$ is negative, so that the reflected light will show an abrupt change of phase of $180^\circ$. This angle of incidence is known as the polarising angle, because if a beam of non-polarised light is incident at this angle, the reflected beam will consist entirely of light polarised in the plane of incidence, and will accordingly be plane-polarised light.

It has been found by Jamin that formula (566) is not quite accurate at and near the polarising angle. It appears from experiment that a certain small amount of light is reflected at all angles, and that instead of a sudden change of phase of $180^\circ$ occurring at this angle there is a gradual change, beginning at a certain distance on one side of the polarising angle and not reaching $180^\circ$ until a certain distance on the other side. Lord Rayleigh has shown that this discrepancy between theory and experiment can often be attributed largely to the presence of thin films of grease and other impurities on the reflecting surface. Drude has shown that the outstanding discrepancy can be accounted for by supposing the phenomena of reflection and refraction to occur, not actually at the surface between the two media, but throughout a small transition layer of which the thickness must be supposed finite, although small compared with the wave-length of the light.

## Waves in Metallic and Conducting Media.

**599.** In a metallic medium of specific resistance $\tau$, equations (A), namely

$$
\frac{K}{C}\frac{dX}{dt}=\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial z} \qquad (567)
$$

etc., must be replaced, cf. equation (531), by

$$
\left(\frac{4\pi C}{\tau}+\frac{K}{C}\frac{d}{dt}\right)X=\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial z} \qquad (568)
$$

etc.

For a plane wave of light of frequency $p$ we can suppose the time to enter through the complex imaginary $e^{ipt}$ and replace $d/dt$ by $ip$. Thus on the left-hand of equation (567) we have $\dfrac{Kip}{C}X$, while on the left-hand of equation (568) we have $\left(\dfrac{4\pi C}{\tau}+\dfrac{Kip}{C}\right)X$. It accordingly appears that the conducting power of the medium can be allowed for by replacing $K$ by

$$
K+\frac{4\pi C^2}{ip\tau}.
$$

**600.** In a non-conducting medium, equation (535), satisfied by each of the quantities $X$, $Y$, $Z$, $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$, reduces to

$$
-\frac{p^2K\mu}{C^2}\chi=\nabla^2\chi
$$

when the wave is of frequency $p$. The corresponding equation for a conducting medium must, by what has just been said, be

$$
-p^2\left(\frac{K\mu}{C^2}+\frac{4\pi\mu}{ip\tau}\right)\chi=\nabla^2\chi \qquad (569)
$$

For a plane wave propagated in a direction which, for simplicity, we shall suppose to be the axis of $x$, the solution of this equation will be

$$
\chi=Ae^{ipt}e^{\pm(q+ir)x} \qquad (570)
$$

where

$$
(q+ir)^2=-\frac{K\mu p^2}{C^2}+\frac{4\pi i\mu p}{\tau} \qquad (571)
$$

Clearly the solution (570) represents the propagation of waves with a velocity $V$ equal to $p/r$, the amplitude of these waves falling off with a modulus of decay $q$ per unit length.

On equating imaginary parts of equation (571) we obtain

$$
qr=\frac{2\pi\mu p}{\tau} \qquad (572)
$$

so that $q$ is given by

$$
q=\frac{2\pi\mu p}{\tau r}=\frac{2\pi V\mu}{\tau} \qquad (573)
$$

**601.** For a good conductor $\tau$ is small, so that $q$ is large, showing that good conductors are necessarily bad transmitters of light. For a wave of light in silver or copper we may take as approximate values in C.G.S. units, remembering that $\tau$ as given on p. 342 is measured in practical units,

$$
τ=1.6\times10^{-6}\ \text{ohms}=1.6\times10^3\ \text{electromag.},\qquad \mu=1,\qquad V=3\times10^{10},
$$

from which we obtain $q=1.2\times10^8$. It appears that, according to this theory, a ray of light in a good conductor ought to be almost extinguished before traversing more than a small portion of a wave-length. This prediction of the theory is not borne out by experiment, and for a long time this fact was regarded as a difficulty in Maxwell's Electromagnetic Theory.

We shall see below that the difficulty disappears as soon as the simple theory of Maxwell is replaced by a more complex theory in which the existence of electrons is definitely taken into account. But before passing to this more complete theory, we shall examine to what extent the present simple theory is capable of accounting for the phenomena of metallic reflection.

### Metallic Reflection.

**602.** Let us suppose, as in fig. 137, that we have a wave of light incident at an angle $\theta_1$ upon the boundary between two media, and let us suppose medium 2 to be a conducting medium of inductive capacity $K_2'$. Then, cf. § 599, all the analysis which has been given in §§ 590-593 will still hold if we take $K_2$ to be a complex quantity given by

$$
K_2=K_2'+\frac{4\pi C^2}{ip\tau} \qquad (574)
$$

Since $K_2$ is complex, it follows at once that $V_2$ is complex, being given by

$$
V_2^2=\frac{C^2}{K_2\mu_2},
$$

and hence that the angle $\theta_2$ is complex, being given, cf. equation (557), by

$$
\sin^2\theta_2=\frac{\sin^2\theta_1}{V_1^2}V_2^2=\frac{\sin^2\theta_1}{V_1^2}\frac{C^2}{K_2\mu_2}=\sin^2\theta_1\frac{K_1\mu_1}{K_2\mu_2} \qquad (575)
$$

The value of $u$ is now given, from equation (562), by

$$
u^2=\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}\frac{\mu_1}{K_1}\frac{\cos^2\theta_2}{\cos^2\theta_1}
=\frac{K_2\mu_1}{\mu_2K_1}\sec^2\theta_1-\frac{\mu_1^2}{\mu_2^2}\tan^2\theta_1 \qquad (576)
$$

for light polarised in the plane of incidence. For light polarised perpendicular to the plane of incidence, the value of $u$ is found, as before, by interchanging electric and magnetic symbols.

If we put $u=\alpha+i\beta$, we have, as before, equation (564),

$$
\frac{Z'''}{Z'}=\frac{1-u}{1+u}=\frac{1-\alpha-i\beta}{1+\alpha+i\beta}.
$$

If we put this fraction in the form $\rho e^{i\chi}$, then the reflected wave is given by

$$
Z=Z'''e^{i\kappa_1(-x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)}=Z'\rho e^{i\kappa_1(-x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)+\chi}.
$$

Comparing this with the incident wave, for which

$$
Z=Z'e^{i\kappa_1(x\cos\theta_1+y\sin\theta_1-V_1t)},
$$

we see that there is a change of phase $\kappa_1\chi$ at reflection, and the amplitude is changed in the ratio $1: \rho$. The electric force in the refracted wave is accompanied by a system of currents, and these dissipate energy, so that the amplitude of the reflected wave must be less than that of the incident wave.

We have

$$
\rho e^{i\chi}=\frac{1-\alpha-i\beta}{1+\alpha+i\beta},
$$

so that

$$
\rho^2=\frac{(1-\alpha)^2+\beta^2}{(1+\alpha)^2+\beta^2}=1-\frac{4\alpha}{(1+\alpha)^2+\beta^2} \qquad (577)
$$

showing that $\rho<1$, as it ought to be. Also

$$
\chi=-\tan^{-1}\frac{\beta}{1-\alpha}-\tan^{-1}\frac{\beta}{1+\alpha}=-\tan^{-1}\frac{2\beta}{1-\alpha^2-\beta^2} \qquad (578)
$$

**603.** Experimental determinations of the values of $\rho$ and $\chi$ have been obtained, but only for light incident normally, the first medium being air. For this reason we shall only carry on the analysis for the case of $\theta=0$. It is now a matter of indifference whether the light is polarised in or at right angles to the plane of incidence; indeed it is easily verified that the values given for $\rho$ and $\chi$ by equations (577) and (578) are the same in either case.

Taking for simplicity the analysis appropriate to light polarised in the plane of incidence, and putting $\theta=0$, $\mu_1=1$, $K_1=1$, we have from equation (576)

$$
u^2=\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}=\frac{K_2'}{\mu_2}+\frac{4\pi C^2}{ip\tau\mu_2},
$$

and, since $u=\alpha+i\beta$, this gives

$$
\alpha^2-\beta^2=\frac{K_2'}{\mu_2} \qquad (579)
$$

$$
\alpha\beta=-\frac{2\pi C^2}{p\tau\mu_2} \qquad (580)
$$

**604.** Let us consider the results as applied to light of great wave-length, for which $p$ is very small. For such values of $p$, $\alpha\beta$ is clearly very large compared with $\alpha^2-\beta^2$, so that $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are nearly equal numerically, and we may suppose as an approximation that, cf. equation (580),

$$
\alpha=-\beta=\sqrt{\frac{2\pi C^2}{p\tau\mu_2}} \qquad (581)
$$

When $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are equal and large, equation (577) becomes

$$
\rho^2=1-\frac{2}{\alpha}=1-2\sqrt{\frac{p\tau\mu_2}{2\pi C^2}} \qquad (582)
$$

Let us suppose that an incident beam has intensity denoted by 100, and that of this a beam of intensity $R$ is reflected from the surface of the metal, while a beam of intensity $100-R$ enters the metal. Then $R$ may be called the reflecting power of the metal.

The intensity of the absorbed beam is

$$
100-R=100(1-\rho^2)=200\sqrt{\frac{p\tau K_1\mu_2}{2\pi C^2}} \qquad (583)
$$

We notice that for waves of very great wave-length, $p$ very small, $R$ approximates to 100, so that for waves of very great wave-length all metals become perfect reflectors. This is as it should be, for these waves of very long period may ultimately be treated as slowly-changing electrostatic fields, and the electrons at the surface of the metal screen its interior from the effects of the electric disturbances falling upon it, cf. § 114.

Equation (583) predicts the way in which $100-R$ ought to increase as $p$ increases, and an extremely important series of experiments have been conducted by Hagen and Rubens to test the truth of the formula for light of great wave-length. The following table will illustrate the results obtained:

| Metal | observed $100-R$ for $\lambda=12\mu$ | calculated |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Silver | 1.15 | 1.3 |
| Copper | 1.6 | 1.4 |
| Gold | 2.1 | 1.6 |
| Platinum | 3.5 | 3.5 |
| Nickel | 4.1 | 3.6 |
| Steel | 4.9 | 4.7 |
| Bismuth | 17.8 | 11.5 |
| Patent Nickel P | 5.7 | 5.4 |
| Patent Nickel M | 7.0 | 6.2 |
| Constantin | 6.0 | 7.4 |
| Rosse's alloy | 7.1 | 7.3 |
| Brande's and Schunemann's alloy | 9.1 | 8.6 |

In the calculated values, the value of $K$ is assumed to be unity, and an error is of course introduced from the fact that the wave-length dealt with, $\lambda=12\mu$, although large, is still finite.

It will be seen that the agreement between the calculated and the observed values is surprisingly good, when allowance is made for the extreme difficulty of the experiments and for the roughness of some of the approximations which have to be made.

**605.** Hagen and Rubens also conducted experiments for light of wave-lengths $\lambda=25.5\mu$, $8\mu$, and $4\mu$. On comparing the whole series it is found that the differences between observed and calculated values become progressively greater on passing to light of shorter wave-length. Drude has conducted a series of experiments on visible light, from which it appears that the simple theory so far given fails entirely to agree with observation for wave-lengths as short as those of visible light.

## Electron Theory.

**606.** We have now reached a stage in the development of electromagnetic theory in which it is clear that the simple conceptions which have so far been employed are no longer adequate to give a complete explanation of the phenomena. The conceptions on which the preceding analysis has been based have been the original conceptions of Maxwell's theory: it is natural now to examine in what way the theory can be modified or improved by the introduction of the more modern conceptions of the electron theory. Instead of regarding a current as a continuous flow of electricity, we shall take definite account of the presence of electrons. We shall have to consider two sets of electrons, the free and bound electrons of § 345a, these being the mechanisms respectively of conduction and of inductive capacity.

The application of an electric force $X$ will result in a motion of free electrons similar to that investigated in § 345a, and in a motion of the bound electrons similar to that discussed in § 151. But if $X$ is variable with the time, the inertia of the electrons will come into play and the resulting motions will be different from those given by Ohm's law and Faraday's law. We shall suppose that at any instant the current produced by the motion of the free electrons is $u_f$, and that that produced by the motion of the bound electrons is $u_b$.

**607.** We may consider first the evaluation of $u_f$. Taking $N$ to be the number of free electrons per unit volume, and allowing for change of notation, equation (c) of § 345 may be re-written in the form

$$
CX=\tau'u_f+\frac{m}{Ne^2}\frac{du_f}{dt} \qquad (584)
$$

in which, as throughout this chapter, $X$ is expressed in electrostatic units, while $u_f$ is in electromagnetic units, and $\tau'$ stands for $\gamma/Ne^2$, so that $\tau'$ becomes identical with the specific resistance $\tau$ when the currents are steady.

This equation is applicable to our present investigation if we suppose $X$ to be periodic in the time of frequency $p$. Taking $X=X_0e^{ipt}$, the solution of equation (584) is

$$
u_f=\frac{CX_0e^{ipt}}{\tau'+\frac{m}{Ne^2}ip} \qquad (585)
$$

The quantity $\tau'$ here may depend on $p$, and without a full knowledge of the structure of matter it is impossible to decide how important the dependence of $\tau'$ on $p$ may be. We are therefore compelled to retain it as an unknown quantity in our equations, remembering that it becomes identical with $\tau$ when $p=0$, and is probably numerically comparable with $\tau$ for all values of $p$.

We may note that the real part of the current, corresponding to the force $X=X_0\cos pt$, is

$$
\frac{CX_0}{\tau'}\cos(pt-\varepsilon)\cos\varepsilon,
$$

in which

$$
\mathrm{tan}\,\varepsilon=\frac{mp}{Ne^2\tau'},
$$

showing that the inertia of the electrons, as represented in the last term of equation (584), results in a lag $\varepsilon$ in the phase of the current, accompanied by a change in amplitude. The rate of generation of heat by the current $u_f$, being equal to the average value of $u_fX_0\cos pt$, is found to be $\frac{1}{2}\frac{C^2X_0^2}{\tau'}\cos^2\varepsilon$ or $\frac{1}{2}\frac{C^2X_0^2}{\tau_p}$, where

$$
τ_p=τ'\sec^2\varepsilon=τ'+\frac{m^2p^2}{N^2e^4τ'} \qquad (586)
$$

It is worth noticing that for light of short wave-length the last term in $\tau_p$ may be more important than the first term $\tau'$. Thus $\tau_p$ may be largest for good conductors, and smallest for bad conductors.

**608.** We turn to the evaluation of $u_b$, the current produced by the small excursions of the bound electrons, as they oscillate under the periodic electric forces.

We shall regard a molecule, or atom, as in § 151, as a cluster of electrons, and these electrons will be supposed capable of performing small excursions about their positions of equilibrium. As has already been said (§ 192) it is probable that this conception of the structure of the molecule represents only a half-way house towards the truth, but it provides a picture or model of the structure with the help of which many properties may be explained.

Let $\theta_1$, $\theta_2$, ... be generalised coordinates, cf. § 548, determining the positions of the electrons in the molecule, these being chosen so as to be measured from the position of equilibrium. So long as we consider only small vibrations, the kinetic energy $T$ and the potential energy $W$ of the molecule can be expressed in the forms

$$
2W=a_{11}\theta_1^2+2a_{12}\theta_1\theta_2+a_{22}\theta_2^2+\cdots \qquad (587)
$$

$$
2T=b_{11}\dot\theta_1^2+2b_{12}\dot\theta_1\dot\theta_2+b_{22}\dot\theta_2^2+\cdots \qquad (588)
$$

in which the coefficients $a_{11}$, $a_{12}$, $a_{22}$, ... , $b_{11}$, ... may be treated as constants. By a known algebraic process, new variables $\phi_1$, $\phi_2$, ... can be found, such that equations (587), (588) when expressed in terms of these variables assume the forms

$$
2W=\alpha_1\phi_1^2+\alpha_2\phi_2^2+\cdots \qquad (589)
$$

$$
2T=\beta_1\dot\phi_1^2+\beta_2\dot\phi_2^2+\cdots \qquad (590)
$$

these equations involving only squares of the new coordinates $\phi_1$, $\phi_2$, ... . The coordinates found in this way for any dynamical system are spoken of as the principal coordinates of the system.

The equation of motion of the molecule, when acted on by no external forces, is readily found to be, cf. equations (500),

$$
\beta_s\ddot\phi_s=-\alpha_s\phi_s,\qquad (s=1,2,\ldots) \qquad (591)
$$

These equations are known to represent simply periodic changes in $\phi_1$, $\phi_2$, ... of frequencies $n_1$, $n_2$, ... given by

$$
n_s^2=\frac{\alpha_s}{\beta_s} \qquad (592)
$$

The frequencies of vibration of the molecule are, however, the frequencies of which we have evidence in the lines of the spectrum emitted by the substance under consideration, so that equations (592) connect the frequencies of the spectral lines with the coefficients of the principal coordinates of the molecule.

**609.** If now the molecule is supposed to vibrate under the influence of externally applied forces, such, for instance, as would occur during the passage of a wave of light through the medium, equation (591) must be replaced, cf. equation (508), by

$$
\beta_s\ddot\phi_s=-\alpha_s\phi_s+\Phi_s \qquad (593)
$$

where $\Phi_s$ is that part of the generalised force corresponding to the coordinate $\phi_s$, which originates in the externally applied forces.

If $X$ is the electromotive force in the wave of light at any instant, each electron will experience a force $Xe$, and there will be a contribution of the form $\xi_sXe$ to $\Phi_s$.

Again the electrostatic field created by the displacements of the electrons in the various neighbouring molecules will contribute a further term to $\Phi_s$. The displacement of any electron through a distance $\xi$ will produce the same field as the creation of a doublet of strength $e\xi$. Thus if there are $M$ molecules per unit volume, the total strength of the doublets per unit volume, say $\Gamma$, may be supposed to be of the form

$$
\Gamma=Me(\gamma_1\phi_1+\gamma_2\phi_2+\cdots) \qquad (594)
$$

and these will produce an electric intensity of which the average value may be taken to be, cf. § 145, $\kappa\Gamma$, which must be added to the original intensity $X$ of the wave.

The total value of $\Phi_s$ is therefore $\xi_se(X+\kappa\Gamma)$, so that on replacing $\alpha_s$ by its value from equation (592), equation (593) becomes

$$
\beta_s(\ddot\phi_s+n_s^2\phi_s)=\xi_se(X+\kappa\Gamma) \qquad (595)
$$

If we suppose $X$ to depend on the time through the factor $e^{ipt}$, then $\phi$ will clearly depend on the time through the same factor, and we may replace $\ddot\phi_s$ by $-p^2\phi_s$. Equation (595) now becomes

$$
\phi_s=\frac{\xi_se(X+\kappa\Gamma)}{\beta_s(n_s^2-p^2)} \qquad (596)
$$

whence, by equation (594),

$$
\Gamma=Me^2\Sigma \frac{\gamma_s\xi_s}{\beta_s(n_s^2-p^2)}(X+\kappa\Gamma) \qquad (597)
$$

and if we write

$$
θ=Me^2\Sigma \frac{\gamma_s\xi_s}{\beta_s}\frac{1}{(n_s^2-p^2)} \qquad (598)
$$

this gives, as the value of $\Gamma$,

$$
\Gamma=\frac{\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}X \qquad (599)
$$

The current produced by the motion of the bound electrons is $u_b$ in electromagnetic, and therefore $Cu_b$ in electrostatic units. Its value in electrostatic units is also, cf. § 345a, $Neu$ or $\Sigma e\,\dfrac{d\xi}{dt}$, where the summation is taken through a unit volume, and this in turn is equal to $\dot\Gamma$. Thus

$$
u_b=\frac{\dot\Gamma}{C}=\frac{ip\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}\frac{X}{C}.
$$

The total current, expressed in electromagnetic units, is

$$
\frac{1}{C}\frac{df}{dt}+u_b+u_f.
$$

In calculating $f$ we must remember that the polarisation produced by the motion of the bound electrons is already allowed for in the presence of the term $u_b$. We accordingly take $f$ equal simply to $X/4\pi$, and on further replacing $u_b$ and $u_f$ by the values found for them, the total current becomes

$$
\frac{ipX}{4\pi C}\left(1+\frac{4\pi\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}\right)+\frac{CX}{\tau'+\frac{m}{Ne^2}ip} \qquad (600)
$$

In place of equation (569), the equation of propagation is

$$
-p^2\left\{\frac{\mu}{C^2}\left(1+\frac{4\pi\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}\right)+\frac{4\pi\mu}{ip\left(\tau'+\frac{m}{Ne^2}ip\right)}\right\}\chi=\nabla^2\chi.
$$

As in § 600, the solution is

$$
\chi=Ae^{ipt}e^{\pm(q+ir)x} \qquad (601)
$$

where

$$
(q+ir)^2=-\frac{\mu p^2}{C^2}\left(1+\frac{4\pi\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}\right)+\frac{4\pi\mu ip}{\tau'+\frac{m}{Ne^2}ip} \qquad (602)
$$

### Non-conducting Media.

**610.** For a non-conducting medium $\tau'=\infty$, so that the last term in equation (602) vanishes, and the right-hand member becomes wholly real. For certain values of $\theta$, this right-hand member is negative, so that $q=0$, showing that light is transmitted without diminution; the medium is perfectly transparent.

For transparent media we may take $\mu=1$, and the velocity of propagation $V$ is given by

$$
\frac{1}{V^2}=\frac{r^2}{p^2}=\frac{1}{C^2}\left(1+\frac{4\pi\theta}{1-\kappa\theta}\right).
$$

If $\nu$ is the refractive index of the medium, as compared with that of a vacuum, $V=C/\nu$, so that

$$
\nu^2=1+\frac{4\pi\theta}{1-\kappa\theta} \qquad (603)
$$

whence

$$
\frac{\nu^2-1}{\nu^2+a}=\kappa\theta=M\Sigma \frac{c_s}{n_s^2-p^2} \qquad (604)
$$

in which $a=\frac{4\pi}{\kappa}-1$, $c_s=\dfrac{e^2\kappa\gamma_s\xi_s}{\beta_s}$, so that $a$ and $c_s$ are constants.

Clearly, cf. § 609, the values of $c_s$ can be calculated if we make assumptions as to the arrangement of the molecules in the medium. On assuming that the molecules are regularly arranged in cubical piling, $\kappa$ is found to have the value $\frac{4\pi}{3}$, so that $a$ becomes equal to 2.

Formula (604), in which $a$ is neglected altogether, becomes exactly identical with the well-known Sellmeyer or Ketteler-Helmholtz formula for the dispersion of light, of which the accuracy is known to be very considerable. If $a$ is put equal to 2, the formula becomes identical with dispersion formulae which have been suggested by Larmor and Lorentz.

It has been shown by Maclaurin that formula (604) will give results in almost perfect agreement with experiment, at least for certain solids, if $a$ is treated as an adjustable constant. The agreement of the formula is so very good that little doubt can be felt that it is founded on a true basis. Maclaurin finds for $a$ values widely different from 2, for rocksalt $a=5.51$, for fluorite $a=1.04$, the differences between these numbers and 2 pointing perhaps to the crystalline arrangement of the molecules. For liquids and gases we should expect to find $a$ equal to 2.

Since $M$ is proportional to $\rho$, the density of the substance, formula (604) indicates that $\dfrac{\nu^2-1}{\nu^2+a}$ ought to vary directly as $\rho$ when $\rho$ varies. This law, with $a$ taken equal to 2, was announced by H. A. Lorentz of Leyden and L. Lorenz of Copenhagen in 1880. Its truth has been verified by various observers, and, in particular, by Magri, for a large range of densities of air.

From equation (604) it also follows that the values of $\dfrac{\nu^2-1}{\nu^2+a}$ for a mixture of liquids or gases ought to be equal to the sum of the values of $\dfrac{\nu^2-1}{\nu^2+a}$ for its ingredients, a law which is also found to agree closely with observation on taking $a=2$.

**611.** For certain other values of $\theta$, the right hand of equation (601), in which $\tau$ is taken infinite, is found to be real and positive. We now have $r=0$ and the solution (601) becomes

$$
\chi=Ae^{ipt}e^{\pm qx},
$$

showing that there is no wave-motion proper, but simply extinction of the light. Thus there are certain ranges of values of $p$, namely those which make $(q+ir)^2$ positive in equation (601), for which light cannot be transmitted at all. Clearly these represent absorption bands in the spectrum of the substance.

Clearly $(q+ir)^2$ becomes positive when $\theta$ is large and negative. It will be noticed that $\theta$, as given by equation (598), becomes infinite when $p$ has any of the values $n_1$, $n_2$, ..., changing from $-\infty$ to $+\infty$ as $p$ passes through these values. Thus the absorption bands will occur close to the frequencies of the natural vibrations of the molecule. But just in these regions we have to consider certain new physical agencies which cannot legitimately be neglected when $p$ has values near to $n_1$, $n_2$, ..., although probably negligible in other regions of the spectrum.

**612.** Equation (593) is not strictly true with the value we have assigned to $\Phi_s$. For, in the first place the vibrations represented by the changes in $\phi_s$ are subject to dissipation on account of the radiation of light, and of this no account has been taken. In the second place there must be sudden forces acting in liquids and gases occasioned by molecular impacts and requiring the addition of terms to $\Phi_s$ throughout the short periods of these impacts. There must be analogous changes to be considered in the case of a solid, although our ignorance of the processes of molecular motion in a solid makes it impossible to specify them with any precision.

The effect of these agencies must be to throw the $\phi_s$'s of the different molecules out of phase with one another and also out of phase with $X$ and $\Gamma$. The analysis of § 609 has made the ratios of $X:\Gamma:\phi_s$ wholly real, cf. equations (596) and (597), indicating that $X$, $\Gamma$, and $\phi_s$ are exactly in the same phase. The considerations just brought forward show that these ratios ought also to contain small imaginary parts.

The process of separating real and imaginary parts in equation (602) now becomes much more complicated, but it will be obvious that for all values of $p$, both $q$ and $r$ will have some value different from zero. Thus there is always some extinction of light and some transmission, for all values of $p$, and there is no longer the sudden change from total extinction to perfect transmission. The edges of the absorption band become gradual and not sharp. Hardly enough is known of the details of molecular action to make it worth trying to represent the conditions now under discussion in exact analysis.

### Conducting Media.

**613.** For a conducting medium we retain $\tau$ in equation (602), and obtain on equating imaginary parts, cf. equation (572),

$$
qr=\frac{2\pi p\mu\tau'}{\tau'^2+\frac{m^2p^2}{N^2e^4}}=\frac{2\pi\mu p}{\tau_p},
$$

so that instead of equation (573) we have

$$
q=\frac{2\pi V\mu}{\tau_p}.
$$

For visible light this gives a very much smaller value of $q$ than that discussed in § 600, and the value of $q$ will obviously be still further modified by the considerations mentioned in § 612.

On comparing the total current, as given by formula (600), with the value $\dfrac{ipKX}{4\pi C}$ assigned to it in the analysis of §§ 594-598, we see that all this earlier analysis will apply to the present problem if we suppose $K$ to be a complex quantity given by

$$
K=\nu^2+\frac{4\pi C^2}{ip\left(\tau'+\frac{m}{Ne^2}ip\right)},
$$

where $\nu$ is given by formula (603).

### Dispersion in Conducting Media.

If, as in § 603, we put

$$
u^2=\frac{K_2}{\mu_2}=(\alpha+i\beta)^2,
$$

we find

$$
\alpha^2-\beta^2=\frac{1}{\mu_2}\left\{\nu^2-\frac{m}{Ne^2}\frac{4\pi C^2}{\tau_p}\right\},
$$

$$
\alpha\beta=-\frac{2\pi C^2}{p\tau_p\mu_2},
$$

from which, in combination with equation (577), the reflecting power $R$ of a metal may be calculated.

On comparing these formulae with experiment, the general result appears to emerge, that, in order to account for the optical properties of conductors in this way, the number of free electrons in conductors must be comparable with the number of atoms. According to a paper by Schuster, published in 1904, the ratio of the number of free electrons to atoms must range from 1 to 3 in various substances; Nicholson, as the result of a more elaborate investigation, obtains values for this ratio ranging from 2 to 7.

**613a.** This result, however, discloses a difficulty from which the electron theory has so far shown little power of extricating itself.

According to the well-known law of Dulong and Petit the atomic heats of a large number of elements have values which are approximately all equal. Nernst and Lindemann have recently determined the specific heats of a large number of elements, and have found that, for all the elements they have examined, the atomic heats measured for constant volume, after correction for expansion arising out of change of temperature, have all the same value 5.95. Now the atomic heat represents the increase per unit rise of temperature in the energy of the solid measured per atom of its structure. This energy can be regarded as the sum of two contributions, namely the energy of the atoms and the energy of the free electrons. The energy of the atoms can be calculated by the well-known methods of the kinetic theory of matter, and it is found that this energy will provide a contribution to the atomic heat equal exactly to the total amount of the atomic heat, namely 5.95; in other words the contribution from the energy of the free electrons is as small as the experimental error. But the contribution from a given number of free electrons also admits of theoretical calculation. If there were as many free electrons as one-tenth of the number of atoms, the contribution to the atomic heat would be .30, so that the total atomic heat would be 6.25, a number much too large to be reconciled with the experiments of Nernst and Lindemann.

The foregoing figures refer only to matter at comparatively high temperatures. The specific heats of the elements have however been determined by Nernst and Lindemann through a very wide range of temperatures, namely from normal temperatures down to the lowest temperatures now available in the laboratory. And it has recently been shown by Debye that the atomic heats found by these experiments are, at all temperatures, almost exactly equal to those to be expected on theoretical grounds on the supposition that the free electrons contribute nothing to the specific heat. The observed atomic heats agree so well with those calculated from theory, for all substances examined and at all temperatures available, that the conclusion seems to be inevitable that the number of free electrons is very small compared with the number of atoms.

Thus we are led to the conclusion that although the electron theory may show a certain power of explaining the optical properties of metals qualitatively at least, yet the explanation given by the electron theory demands the presence of a far greater number of free electrons than can be reconciled with the values of the specific heats.

**613b.** A similar difficulty has been found to arise in connection with a much simpler phenomenon, namely the conductivity of metals. We have seen, § 345a, that the electron theory requires that in a good conductor the number of free electrons should be large; approximately how large it must be is a matter which can also be determined by further analysis. The requisite analysis has been given by Drude.

We may suppose, as a rough approximation to the truth, that in a conductor each free electron moves freely for a certain length of time $t$ between two consecutive collisions with molecules. In the notation already used in § 345a, the momentum gained in this time will be $Xet$. If we suppose this momentum to be entirely checked at each collision, cf. §§ 355, 373, the average forward momentum of all the electrons at any instant will be $\frac{1}{2}Xet$, and since this is equal to $mu$ in the notation of § 345a, we have

$$
u=\frac{1}{2}\frac{Xe}{m}t,
$$

and hence, by equation (b), § 345a,

$$
i=Neu=\frac{1}{2}\frac{Ne^2}{m}tX.
$$

Thus the quantity $\gamma$ of § 345a is, as regards order of magnitude at least, equal to $\dfrac{2m}{t}$, and the specific resistance $\tau$ of a substance will be given by

$$
\frac{1}{\tau}=\frac{1}{2}\frac{Ne^2}{m}t,
$$

where $N$ is the number of free electrons per cubic centimetre. Now for silver or copper $\tau=1.6\times10^{-6}$ ohms $=1.8\times10^{-18}$ in electrostatic units. The value of $\dfrac{1}{2}\dfrac{e^2}{m}$ in electrostatic units is $1.2\times10^8$, and hence to give to $\tau$ the value appropriate for silver or copper we must have $Nt=5\times10^9$ approximately. In silver or copper the number of atoms per cubic centimetre is of the order of $10^{23}$, so that if the observed values of the specific heats do not allow of $N$ being more than one-hundredth part of this we must at most suppose that $N$ is of the order of $10^{21}$, and this requires $t$ to be comparable with $5\times10^{-12}$ at least. Since the average velocity of the free electrons is believed to be about $10^7$ cms. per second, this would require each electron to travel an average distance of $5\times10^{-5}$ cms. between consecutive violent collisions. This appears to be too large to be reconciled with present beliefs as to the structure of matter.

The difficulty becomes more glaring if we consider the phenomenon at low temperatures. Kamerlingh Onnes has found for silver at a temperature of 13.88° abs. a resistance only equal to .07 per cent. of that at 0° C. Thus in silver at this low temperature we must have $Nt$ of the order of $10^{12}$, so that if we take $N=10^{21}$ as above, $t=10^{-9}$. This velocity of free electrons at this low temperature is of the order of $2\times10^6$, so that the average distance travelled would be about $\frac{4}{500}$ cms.

The difficulty seems to be inherent to the whole electron theory of conduction, and so far no explanation has been suggested.

## Crystalline Dielectric Media.

**614.** Let us consider the propagation of light, on the electromagnetic theory, in a crystalline medium in which the ratio of the polarisation to the electric force is different in different directions.

By equation (92), the electric energy $W$ per unit volume in such a medium is given by

$$
W=\frac{1}{8\pi}(K_{11}X^2+2K_{12}XY+\cdots).
$$

If we transform axes, and take as new axes of reference the principal axes of the quadric

$$
K_{11}x^2+2K_{12}xy+\cdots=1 \qquad (605)
$$

then the energy per unit volume becomes

$$
W=\frac{1}{8\pi}(K_1X^2+K_2Y^2+K_3Z^2),
$$

where $K_1$, $K_2$, $K_3$ are the coefficients which occur in the equation of the quadric (605) when referred to its principal axes. The components of polarisation are now given by, cf. equations (89),

$$
4\pi f=K_1X,\qquad 4\pi g=K_2Y,\qquad 4\pi h=K_3Z,
$$

and the equations of propagation, putting $\mu=1$, now become

$$
\frac{K_1}{C}\frac{dX}{dt}=\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial z},
$$

$$
\frac{K_2}{C}\frac{dY}{dt}=\frac{\partial\alpha}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial\gamma}{\partial x},
$$

$$
\frac{K_3}{C}\frac{dZ}{dt}=\frac{\partial\beta}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial\alpha}{\partial y},
$$

$$
-\frac{1}{C}\frac{d\alpha}{dt}=\frac{\partial Z}{\partial y}-\frac{\partial Y}{\partial z},
$$

$$
-\frac{1}{C}\frac{d\beta}{dt}=\frac{\partial X}{\partial z}-\frac{\partial Z}{\partial x},
$$

$$
-\frac{1}{C}\frac{d\gamma}{dt}=\frac{\partial Y}{\partial x}-\frac{\partial X}{\partial y}. \qquad (607), (608)
$$

On assuming a solution in which $X$, $Y$, $Z$ are proportional to

$$
e^{i\kappa(lx+my+nz-Vt)} \qquad (606)
$$

these equations become

$$
\frac{V^2}{C^2}K_1X=X-l(lX+mY+nZ)=0, \quad \text{etc.}
$$

On eliminating $X$, $Y$, and $Z$ from these three equations, we obtain

$$
\frac{l^2}{V^2K_1/C^2-1}+\frac{m^2}{V^2K_2/C^2-1}+\frac{n^2}{V^2K_3/C^2-1}+1=0.
$$

If we put $C^2/K_1=v_1^2$, etc., and simplify, this becomes

$$
\frac{l^2}{V^2-v_1^2}+\frac{m^2}{V^2-v_2^2}+\frac{n^2}{V^2-v_3^2}=0.
$$

This equation gives the velocity of propagation $V$ in terms of the direction-cosines $l$, $m$, $n$ of the normal to the wave-front. The equation is identical with that found by Fresnel to represent the results of experiment. It can be shown that the corresponding wave-surface is the well-known Fresnel wave-surface, and all the geometrical phenomena of the propagation of light in a crystalline medium follow directly. For the development of this part of the theory, the reader is referred to books on physical optics.

Assuming that $\alpha$, $\beta$, $\gamma$ as well as $X$, $Y$, $Z$ are proportional to the exponential (606), the original system of equations becomes

$$
-\frac{K_1V}{C}X=m\gamma-n\beta, \quad \text{etc.} \qquad (607)
$$

$$
\frac{V}{C}\alpha=mZ-nY, \quad \text{etc.} \qquad (608)
$$

If we multiply the three equations of system (607) by $l$, $m$, $n$ respectively and add, we obtain

$$
lK_1X+mK_2Y+nK_3Z=0 \qquad (609)
$$

while a similar treatment of equations (608) gives

$$
l\alpha+m\beta+n\gamma=0 \qquad (610)
$$

From equation (609) we see that the electric polarisation is in the wave-front. From equation (610), the magnetic force also is in the wave-front.

From this point onwards the development of the subject is the same on the electromagnetic as on any other theory of light.

## Mechanical Action.

### Energy in Light-waves.

**615.** For a wave of light propagated along the axis of $Ox$, and having the electric force parallel to $Oy$, we have, cf. § 592, the solution

$$
X=Z=0;\qquad Y=Y_0\cos\kappa(x-at),
$$

$$
\alpha=\beta=0;\qquad \gamma=\gamma_0\cos\kappa(x-at),
$$

and this satisfies all the electromagnetic equations, provided the ratio of $\gamma_0$ to $Y_0$ is given by

$$
\frac{\gamma_0}{Y_0}=\frac{Ka}{C}=\frac{C}{\mu a}=\sqrt{\frac{K}{\mu}} \qquad (611)
$$

The energy per unit volume at the point $x$ is seen to be

$$
\frac{1}{8\pi}(KY^2+\mu\gamma^2)=\frac{1}{8\pi}(KY_0^2+\mu\gamma_0^2)\cos^2\kappa(x-at) \qquad (612)
$$

From equation (611) we see that the electric energy is equal to the magnetic at every point of the wave. The average energy per unit volume, obtained by averaging expression (612) with respect either to $x$ or to $t$, is

$$
\frac{KY_0^2}{8\pi}=\frac{\mu\gamma_0^2}{8\pi}.
$$

As Maxwell has pointed out, these formulae enable us to determine the magnitude of the electric and magnetic forces involved in the propagation of light. According to the determination of Langley, the mean energy of sunlight, after allowing for partial absorption by the earth's atmosphere, is $4.3\times10^{-5}$ ergs per unit volume. This gives, as the maximum value of the electric intensity,

$$
Y_0=.33\ \text{C.G.S. electrostatic units}=9.9\ \text{volts per centimetre},
$$

and, as the maximum value of the magnetic force,

$$
\gamma_0=.033\ \text{C.G.S. electromagnetic units},
$$

which is about one-sixth of the horizontal component of the earth's field in England.

### The Pressure of Radiation.

**616.** In virtue of the existence of the electric intensity $Y$, there is in free ether (§ 165) a pressure $KY^2/8\pi$ at right angles to the lines of electric force. Thus there is a pressure $KY^2/8\pi$ per unit area over each wave-front. Similarly the magnetic field results (§ 471) in a pressure of amount $\mu\gamma^2/8\pi$ per unit area. Thus the total pressure per unit area

$$
\frac{KY^2+\mu\gamma^2}{8\pi}=\frac{KY_0^2+\mu\gamma_0^2}{8\pi}\cos^2\kappa(x-at)
$$

is exactly equal to the energy per unit volume as given by expression (612). Thus we see that over every wave-front there ought, on the electromagnetic theory, to be a pressure of amount per unit area equal to the energy of the wave per unit volume at that point. The existence of this pressure has been demonstrated experimentally by Lebedew and by Nichols and Hull, and their results agree quantitatively with those predicted by Maxwell's Theory.

## References.

On the Electromagnetic Theory of Light:

Maxwell. *Electricity and Magnetism*. Vol. II, Part IV, Chap. xx.

H. A. Lorentz. *The Theory of Electrons*. (Teubner, Leipzig, 1909.) Chap. iv.

*Encyclopädie der Mathematischen Wissenschaften*. (Teubner, Leipzig.) Band v 3, I. p. 95.

On Physical Optics:

Schuster. *Theory of Optics*. (Arnold, London, 1904.)

Drude. *Theory of Optics* (translation by Mann and Millikan). (Longmans Green and Co., 1902.)

Wood. *Physical Optics*. (Macmillan, 1905.)
